Title: <scp>COVID</scp>‐19, crisis, and emotional stress: A biocultural perspective of their impact on growth and development for the next generation
Authors: Barry Bogin, Carlos Varea
ID: openalex.W3043092860
URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/ajhb.23474

2020. «Paintings for Wuhan», Li Zhong (China) © Li Zhong through Tricontinental:
Institute for Social Research. Li Zhong is president of the Artist Association
of Fengxian District, Shanghai (China). An interview with Li Zhong and a series
of paintings on the fight in China against the COVID-19 pandemic area is
available in Painting and epidemic. This is a Commentary on the impact of the
current COVID-19 pandemic on future human growth and development. Our focus is
on birth weight, one measure of prenatal growth and development, and its
association with later life health. We assess the possibilities from the broad
biocultural sense of human growth and development, especially in relation to its
social-economic-political-emotional (SEPE) correlates. The biocultural
perspective includes all aspects of human ecology in terms of biology, behavior,
thinking, and beliefs. Human ecology and human biology are directly influenced
by SEPE factors. A case in point is that on April 2, 2020 in the U.S. a freight
train driver purposefully derailed his train to destroy the hospital ship Mercy
sent to help with the COVID-19 crisis. The train driver said he did it because
he believed the Mercy was part of suspicious activities involving the
coronavirus. In addition, during the first week of April, 5G cellular
communication towers in Birmingham, Liverpool and Melling, UK were burned by
people claiming that 5G technology is the cause of COVID-19. Such emotionally
and ideologically driven behavior always happen during pandemics. In the year
1630, a Bubonic Plague epidemic erupted in Milan, which also was at war with
Spain. Four Spaniards in Milan were arrested, convicted of spreading Plague, and
sentenced to death by torture. During the Plague pandemic of 1349 the people of
Strasbourg, Alsace accused Jews of poisoning the water wells. One thousand Jews
were arrested, taken to the cemetery, and burned alive. These cases and others
of paranoia and murder during pandemics are described by medical historian Frank
M Snowden in his book, Epidemics and Society: From the Black Death to the
Present (Snowden, 2019).1 Fear of pandemic disease spreads as fast and as deep
as the disease itself. The fear plays-out in in many ways, from extremes of
paranoia and violence, to xenophobia, closed borders, economic lockdowns, and
social distancing. The fear pervades every level of society. The fear causes
emotional stress. Chronic emotional stress—from insecurity that lasts for months
or years—has biological impacts on people. Along with several colleagues, we
have been investigating the impact of chronic emotional stress on human growth.
In one series of studies, we analyzed changes in birth weight related to the
2008 financial crisis in Spain. We reported a decline in birth weight across
virtually all maternal social-economic groups in Spain in the years leading up
to, and especially, during the financial crisis (Terán, Juárez, Bernis, Bogin, &
Varea, 2020; Terán, Varea, Juárez, Bernis, & Bogin, 2018; Varea, Terán, Bernis,
Bogin, & González-González, 2016). Our findings are supported by studies
reporting reduced birth weight in Portugal, Iceland, Japan, and Greece during
the 2008 banking system crisis, which was a global financial pandemic (Kana,
Correia, Peleteiro, Severo, & Barros, 2017; Olafsson, 2016; Ueda, Kondo, &
Fujiwara, 2015; Zografaki, Papamichail, & Panagiotopoulos, 2018). Many factors
influence human birth weight. A few well-studied variables are maternal age,
maternal size (height) and body composition, maternal psychological stress,
gestational age at delivery, mother's hemoglobin concentration, and per capita
daily income of the mother or family (reviewed in Bisai, Mahalanabis, & Bose,
2007; Bisai, Sen, Mahalanabis, Datta, & Bose, 2006). Other known influences of
birth weight are maternal or fetal genetic anomalies; maternal exposure to
infectious disease; maternal parasite load; maternal systemic diseases such as
diabetes, hypertension, periodontal disease; abnormal placental development, and
function that impairs fetal nutrition and oxygenation; maternal use or exposure
to tobacco smoking, use of alcohol or many prescribed or illicit drugs (Negrato
& Gomes, 2013). Maternal exposure to ambient air pollution is known to lower
birth weight and increase the risk of preterm birth (Stieb, Chen, Eshoul, &
Judek, 2012; Woodward, Finch, & Morgan, 2015). While any or all these variables
may influence birth weight, we interpreted the findings from our Spanish
research in terms of SEPE factors. Our interpretation was guided by the fact
that the entire Spanish population of births was similarly affected. This
includes births to women of all household income levels, educational attainment,
region of the country, urban or rural residence, body composition, health
status, and exposure to air pollution. The Spanish National registry of births
does not include most of these variables. However, given the population-wide
changes in birth weight, the impact of the 2008 financial crisis on pregnant
women and birth outcome may have come about as an emotional response by mothers
to the interaction of social, economic, and political factors at individual,
family, and community levels. At all three levels, there was a reduction in
material resources, such as jobs, money, and housing, deteriorating
environmental conditions due to the closure or curtailment of public and private
sector services in health, education, sanitation, and so forth, and a widespread
increase in psycho-social stress due to the insecurity of material resources,
reliability of services, and uncertainty of the future. These SEPE sequelae of
the 2008 financial crisis are tightly comingled, as the material, environmental,
and psychosocial stress were caused by the political decisions of the Spanish
government to impose harsh fiscal and social austerity policies on the entire
population. The uncertainties and psychosocial stress caused by the 2008
financial crisis and the governmental reactions to it could explain the Spanish
birth weight reductions at two levels: first, at a population level, the crisis
might determine changes in the sociodemographic profile of women who become
mothers, with an increasing predominance of older women, who may have been at
higher gestational or obstetrical risk; and second, at an individual level, the
crisis might affect fetal development and birth outcome through direct worsening
of living conditions and increased maternal stress during pregnancy. We analyzed
the impact of both levels using a join point regression analysis to identify the
time periods of significant changes in the prevalence of LBW by parity (Terán et
al., 2020). Adjusted relative risk (RR) of LBW by year of birth was calculated
in order to confirm that the time trend differences in LBW by parity were
independent of possible confounders. The prevalence of LBW among singleton live
births to primipara increased from 5.12% in 1996 to 6.87% in 2008 and then
stabilized at that maximum value. Among live births to multipara LBW increased
from 3.96% in 1996 to a maximum of 5.20% in 2008 and then significantly reduced
(Figure 1). Trends in adjusted RR of LBW by parity confirm that primipara and
multipara were affected differently by the financial crisis. Older, nulliparous
women may have felt more biosocial pressure to reproduce during the financial
crisis, compared with women who were already mothers. That biosocial pressure
may have increased the risks for LBW. For all women, the global SEPE stress
imposed in the years up to the financial crisis associated with a statistically
and biologically significant increase in LBW. There is a growing body of
evidence in the literature for pathways from SEPE stress toward LBW. Several key
articles were published in the American Journal of Human Biology. An
evolutionary perspective on maternal stress and fetal responses was taken by Ivy
Pike (2005). While she focused on preterm delivery, Pike did report that the
stress of racial discrimination is associated with the consistently lower birth
weights of African American neonates compared with European Americans.
Countering claims that low birth weights for African Americans are due to
genetic factors, Pike reviews the evidence published by David and Collins (1997)
that recently immigrated women of African origin have higher birth weight babies
than African Americans, but the risks for poor pregnancy outcomes increase with
the duration of stay and exposure to racial discrimination of the immigrants in
the United States. Discrimination and racism based on skin color, ethnicity,
religion or any other characteristic of human groups is a powerful SEPE stress
with measurable biological consequences. Building on Pike's review and analysis,
Kuzawa and Sweet (2009) employed a social constructivist model to integrate the
extensive literature showing how SEPE stresses become “embodied,” meaning in
this case, how material and psychosocial discrimination are transduced into
human biology, creating durable and transgenerational influences on health
disparities in the United States (Figure 2). Kuzawa & Sweet's focus was on the
social origin of prematurity and LBW in African Americans. They emphasized the
biocultural pathways by which the effects of racial discrimination impact
maternal stress physiology and lead to lower birth weight. In turn, lower birth
weight babies are known to have higher risks for adult overweight and associated
diseases. In this model, there are direct, “…links between early life
environmental factors like maternal stress during pregnancy and adult race-based
health disparities in diseases like hypertension, diabetes, stroke, and coronary
heart disease” (p. 2). Empirical evidence for the transgenerational transmission
of synergism between physiological stress and lower birth weight is provided in
two studies by Zaneta Thayer and colleagues. They measured salivary cortisol, a
widely used indicator of psychosocial and physiological stress. Both the
absolute levels of salivary cortisol and its diurnal variation have been shown
to be associated with reduced growth in body length (Nyberg et al., 2012). The
first study (Thayer, Feranil, & Kuzawa, 2012), included a sample of 488
participants, mothers aged 20.8 to 22.3 years old, of the Cebu Longitudinal
Health and Nutrition Survey, Philippines. Thayer and colleagues reported that
mothers who were themselves born with lower birth weight had higher evening
cortisol levels (P < .04) and that independently both lower maternal birth
weight (P < .0001) and higher evening cortisol in adulthood (P = .003) predicted
lower birth weight for male offspring. The associations for female offspring
birth weight were not statistically significant (maternal birth weight, P = .07;
bedtime cortisol, P = .3). The second study (Thayer & Kuzawa, 2014) was
conducted in Auckland, New Zealand with a sample of 55 women at 34 to 36 weeks
gestation. The socioeconomic status (SES) of the women was categorized using the
locally validated NZ Deprivation Index for individuals (NZiDep). Maternal saliva
samples were assessed for cortisol in the morning and at evening bedtime.
Offspring salivary cortisol (N = 19) was assessed before and after a standard
vaccination, a mild trauma, 6 weeks after birth. The authors reported that,
“…after controlling for ethnicity and other covariates, women with higher NZiDep
scores had significantly higher evening but similar morning cortisol, consistent
with a pattern of chronic strain. Infants of women reporting greater material
deprivation had elevated cortisol response to vaccination” (p. 723). Greater
material deprivation and the chronic, daily stress this causes was associated
with greater cortisol reactivity in both mothers and offspring. The authors
review research showing that greater morning-to-evening reactivity and
posttrauma reactivity are both predictive of poorer health now and in the
future. Research in Yucatan, Mexico connects the studies just reviewed, and many
others on maternal SEPE stress and birth weight, to later life physical growth.
Hugo Azcorra, Samantha Sanchez-Escobedo and colleagues have been working with
Maya families, all of whom are of low socioeconomic status (Azcorra, Dickinson,
Bogin, Rodríguez, & Varela-Silva, 2015; Sanchez-Escobedo et al., 2020). One
study included 109 families with measurements of a 6 to 8-year-old child,
her/his mother, and the mother's mother (grandmother) living in Merida, the
largest urban area of Yucatan. The researchers used total height and leg length
as proxies for the quality of the material and SEPE environment. It was reported
that maternal height and leg length were positively associated with child height
and leg length. The association was relatively stronger for leg length, which is
often a better index than total height of the quality of living conditions
during infancy and childhood (Bogin & Varela-Silva, 2010). Better living
conditions of the grandmother in terms of house quality and larger family size
were significantly associated with higher values of leg length in the
grandchildren. All the grandmothers grew-up in rural, agricultural areas where
larger family size indicated more secure, less stressful living conditions. So,
even in their current conditions of urban poverty, with daily insecurity from
many material and SEPE stressors, early life conditions of rural-living
grandmothers were shown to have transgenerational effects on the linear growth
of the grandchildren. In another study the researchers worked with 260 dyads of
Maya children aged 6 to 8 years and their mothers living in the city of Merida
and the town of Motul, Yucatan, Mexico. The authors reported that child height-
for-age was positively associated with the child's birth weight and with
maternal height and mother's current age, but inversely associated with birth
order and age of introduction of solid foods, that is, the age of termination of
breastfeeding. These findings were interpreted to indicate that well-being of
the children, as measured by their height-for-age, is influenced by both the
quality of SEPE living conditions when the mother was growing-up and during her
pregnancy, and by the child's own SEPE conditions. Taken together, these two
Mexican studies and the others reviewed above, all support the life course,
intergenerational model of SEPE stressors and their influence on birth weight
and later growth, development, and health illustrated in Figure 2. The SEPE
stress and low birth weight research published in the AJHB is just the very top
of the “tip of the in terms all such We just a few more studies with direct to
the COVID-19 crisis and its effects on human growth and development. A from SEPE
stressors to is shown in Figure 2. Kuzawa and Sweet (2009) reviewed evidence
that are less and into with lower risks for hypertension, and The associations
between maternal during pregnancy, and child growth were by and colleagues &
2020). The researchers analyzed and as part of the Longitudinal of and a birth
study of families from the region of the United The findings were that mothers
reporting lower levels of were more to = and their more before The who were for
more than 6 months had a later in months later than after controlling for family
social and the body Both growth in the first year and later age of for growth
adult lower and health. did not influence in using age at as the for in between
the years and of women with singleton births reported that, life stressors, but
not other of stressors, were more to impact LBW among African Americans than et
al., The financial stressors by African Americans, compared with European
Americans, of related to the and SEPE factors reviewed by Pike and Kuzawa and
Sweet A by environmental racism into focus the between SEPE living conditions
and COVID-19 death for African Americans and other groups in the the and 2020).
caused by and other or by and other human activities are causes of stress. The
in the of the in New of people to physical and emotional with and stress. One of
the studies, by and colleagues & outcomes = to pregnant women directly to the at
the of exposure were and in the area on been in the of that from the of a or
more of several been in a that and at of on (p. The women were assessed for
stress and birth outcomes in to and birth outcomes in to 2008 and to and
colleagues that all of direct exposure at the and were associated independently
with both LBW and preterm birth but not with age offspring. The researchers were
to that exposure to from the had an independent not by psychosocial stress, to
both LBW and These birth outcomes for births up to years after the studies
reviewed and other research in the we a review and of studies that assessed the
risk of low birth weight or preterm for women who stress during pregnancy et
al., 2018). The review studies with about pregnant women and (p. of quality and
for There was a statistically significant association between stress exposure
and increasing of low birth weight of P = = There was statistically significant
between and groups in terms of preterm of P = = to The from this review is
maternal stress birth weight. In the of our Spanish financial crisis birth
weight study we that it been known for that birth outcome is associated as with
stress as it is with stressful life et al., 2016). The and increase in LBW
leading up to the 2008 financial crisis may be one of this psychological The
findings of et for the crisis more in that women who the also had higher risk
for LBW. studies the association between birth outcomes and maternal
psychological stress, from chronic and to stressors, by both and life (reviewed
in et al., 2020; et al., 2016). pathways through which the of psychosocial
stress by the mother may lead to outcomes have been of the maternal is an
(reviewed in et al., 2016). The maternal to an increased of from mother to in
lower birth weight and gestational age at The impact of maternal stress on birth
outcomes may also on birth outcomes through increased health such as reduced and
or maternal and review that placental is by the maternal stress and The
prevalence of preterm is associated with maternal stress through increased
levels of maternal of placental which is in the of from several studies that the
impact of maternal stress on fetal growth is in the of pregnancy, when the of
fetal growth in weight is It is that fetal weight growth is affected less by
genetic factors and more by maternal and especially by and fetal exposure to
maternal (Negrato & Gomes, 2013). stress also growth. and emotional stresses of
on height growth were reviewed by and The authors were especially in the causes
of psychosocial a of growth in height that be by physical or They reported that
risk for psychosocial was directly associated with abnormal levels of cortisol,
the response to chronic stress. The emotional stress of the children and their
increased level of stress especially to a of is a of growth the of lead to a of
and significant reductions in the of growth in the and other is the for growth
in all these findings into and that chronic exposure to social stress was a of
of children and independently of other such as poor nutrition and health The
between stress and linear growth is not to children in Social stress factors
such as and deprivation are in human in Bogin, & et al., 2020). due to of
housing, health and is also to and their even in income & 2018). These of are
often and this the and psychosocial stress. It is that these stress factors have
as research is available on SEPE in height & 2017; et al., 2020). In to the
impacts of stress on the research published another This is the from the of
psychosocial to by that to in of to of the to the stress response et al., The is
and toward and to a of social, and emotional which to the is a and The of is
from but this effects on and the is into the where it is reported to several
physiological in an such as and development, and male & 1). evidence with and
with human indicate that of physical and emotional stress cause a in into the
and the of the the of such as cortisol, as as in heart and et al., The of during
the body to and for a response to the stress. In the the of the may be for or in
response to for weight In the the are because a chronic stress response in of
and growth & et al., 2007; & women, their and people of all to chronic,
emotional stress. Chronic stress a on human health, the physical growth of as as
and In to low birth weight, emotional stress is associated with to disease & and
& 2013). Li weight is one of the key of health risks at birth and later in The
of low birth weight include greater risk for poor and greater risk for
psychological reduced adult greater risk for adult diabetes, and heart on an age
at weight is very low and not is a key human biological characteristic and one
that to human The current COVID-19 crisis is biocultural in with and SEPE for
the European that of the European is to by in 2020. by just in the year of the
global financial 2020). The of the are now a level of as the the & 2020). fear
and chronic fear is a stress. It two or more to assess the biocultural of the
COVID-19 crisis on to the One may that for the future there be a global in
maternal emotional stress and a decline in birth weight. and
