Title: Personal and Political: Post‐Traumatic Stress Through the Lens of Social Identity, Power, and Politics
Authors: Orla T. Muldoon, Robert D. Lowe, Jolanda Jetten, Tegan Cruwys, S. Alexander Haslam
ID: openalex.W3110828663
URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/pops.12709

Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) has always been controversial and highly
politicized. Here, using a social identity approach, we review evidence that
trauma and its aftermath are fundamentally linked to social position,
sociopolitical capital, and power. We begin this contribution by demonstrating
how a person's group memberships (and the social identities they derive from
these memberships) are inherently linked to the experience of adversity. We then
go on to consider how it is through group memberships that individuals are
defined by their trauma risk and trauma histories-that is, a person's group
memberships and their trauma are often inherently linked. Considering the
importance of group memberships for understanding trauma, we argue that it is
important to see these, and group processes more generally, as more than just
"demographic" risk factors. Instead, we argue that when groups are defined by
their trauma history or risk, their members will often derive some sense of self
from this trauma. For this reason, attributes of group memberships are important
in developing an understanding of adjustment and adaptation to trauma. In
particular, groups' status, their recourse to justice, and the level of trust
and solidarity within the group are all central to the impact of traumatic
events on individual-level psychological resilience. We review evidence that
supports this analysis by focusing on the exacerbating effects of stigma and
social mistrust on post-traumatic stress, and the value of solidarity and strong
identities for resilience. We conclude that because of these group-related
processes, trauma interweaves the personal with the political and that post-
traumatic stress is fundamentally about power, positionality, and politics.
