Title: A two-stage clustering approach to investigate lifestyle carbon footprints in two Australian cities
Authors: Andreas Froemelt, Thomas Wiedmann
ID: openalex.W3083185741
URL: https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/abb502

Abstract Given the key role of households in driving global emissions and
resource use, a change in their consumption behaviours towards more sustainable
levels is essential to reduce worldwide adverse environmental impacts. Thereby,
focusing on cities is especially important because of today’s large share of the
global population living in cities and because local authorities are close to
the needs of their residents. However, devising targeted and effective policy
measures implies a thorough understanding of prevailing consumption patterns and
associated environmental consequences. The goal of this article is to
investigate and compare household behaviours and lifestyle-induced carbon
footprints in Sydney and Melbourne in order to enhance today’s understanding of
household consumption in cities of a high-income, high-emission country. For
this purpose, we employed a two-stage clustering approach with a Self-Organising
Map and a subsequent Ward-clustering. This allowed for including expenditure
data along with socio-economic attributes and thus for recognising lifestyle-
archetypes. These emerging archetypes represent households with similar
characteristics and comparable consumption patterns. Analysing the archetypes in
detail and performing a city-comparison based on multi-dimensional scaling
revealed similarities and dissimilarities between the two metropoles. ‘Older’
archetypes seem to behave more alike across cities but show different carbon
footprints emphasising the importance of regionalised environmental assessments
and of city-specific supply chains. Distinct patterns especially emerged in the
high- and low-income segments highlighting the different importance of different
lifestyles in each city. Socio-economically similar family-archetypes were found
in both cities, but some of them showed diverging consumption behaviours. This
article showed that studying household-induced environmental impacts in cities
should not rely on macro-trends but should rather be based on city-specific
analyses that capture local peculiarities and consider socio-economic
characteristics and consumption data simultaneously.
