Title: Screen Time Duration and Timing: Effects on Obesity, Physical Activity, Dry Eyes, and Learning Ability in Elementary School Children
Authors: Yui Mineshita, Hyeon‐Ki Kim, Hanako Chijiki, Takuya Nanba, Takae Shinto
ID: openalex.W4238414795
URL: https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-80923/v1

Abstract Background: As internet use becomes more widespread, the screen time
(ST) of elementary school students increases yearly. It is known that longer
durations of ST can affect obesity, physical activity, dry eye disease, and
learning ability. However, the effects of ST just before bedtime have not been
clarified. Therefore, we examined ST duration and timing effects on elementary
school children. Methods: We conducted a survey of 7,419 elementary school
students in Tokyo, Japan using a questionnaire on food education. ST duration
and timing (just before bedtime) served as the explanatory variables, and the
relationship between obesity, physical activity, dry eyes, and learning ability
was analyzed using logistic regression analysis. Gender, school year, height,
and weight were considered confounding factors. First, we examined whether ST
duration and timing were related to each objective variable, using a univariate
model to examine all variables. Thereafter, we performed multivariate logistic
regression analyses for all variables showing a significant difference in the
univariate models. Results: The results showed that the relationship between the
ST duration and obesity, physical activity, and learning ability was
statistically significant. The relationship between ST timing and obesity, dry
eyes, and learning ability was also statistically significant. Therefore, ST
timing has a greater effect on dry eyes, and ST duration has a greater effect on
academic performance. Conclusion: Our findings indicate that ST in school
children is related to obesity, physical activity, dry eyes, and learning
ability, and they suggest that not only the duration but also the timing of ST
is important.
