Title: Dialogical Engagement and the Co-Creation of Cultures of Exploration
Authors: Elin Eriksen Ødegaard
ID: openalex.W3008051491
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-36271-3_6

Abstract The aim of this chapter is to argue for, discuss and outline conditions
for a pedagogy that promote exploration and how they contribute to children’s
cultural formation as it can be understood in the complex context of early
childhood education. The conditions and characteristics of explorative
practices, found in earlier literature and experiences, interact in dynamic ways
and are therefore difficult to grasp. Central to the chapter is the attempt to
visualise how characteristics of explorative practices interact with some
central conditions in local settings. I formulated a pedagogical model of
exploration as dialogical engagement . Moreover, I will present a setup of
binary pairs of educational cultures, principles and practices to answer a
curiosity about what the characteristics in cultures of exploration will be. By
such a setup, the importance of pedagogical dialogical engagement is
highlighted. The chapter is anchored in a cultural historical approach, drawing
on concepts like heteroglossia, speech genres and Mikhail Bakhtin’s loophole,
among others (Bakhtin MM, The problem of the speech genre. In McGee VW (trans.),
Speech genres and other late essays. University of Texas Press, Austin, TX,
60–102, 1986); The chapter argues that dialogism is central to cultures of
exploration. Also, Seth Chaiklin and Mariane Hedegaard’s arguments and ideas for
a radical local pedagogical approach (Chaiklin Z, Hedegaard M, Radical-local
teaching and learning. Århus University Press, London, 2005) are a thinking
tool, along with Roland Robertson’s (Featherstone M, Lash S, Robertson R, Global
modernities. Sage, London, 1995) concept of ‘glocalisation’ (Khondker HH,
Bangladesh J Sociol, 1(2): 1–9. Retrieved from
http://muktomona.net/Articles/habibul_haque/Globalization.pdf , 2004).
Alternative viewpoints and awareness of the local and the global in framing and
recognising children’s experiences are set out in order to argue for a
respectful exchange when considering the content and values of the ‘what’ in
exploration. Cultures of exploration in early childhood education introduce a
promise of a pedagogy where the teacher co-creates kindergarten content when
operating in practice, in planning and meeting children and families in their
local community and in considering activities, relations, place and space.
