Title: Historical Roots of Exploration – Through a Fröbelian Third Space
Authors: Andrea Eikset, Elin Eriksen Ødegaard
ID: openalex.W3008888898
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-36271-3_7

Abstract References to Fröbel are often seen in early childhood educational
research, especially in introductions to topics such as play, learning and
pedagogical ideals, and in the origin of early childhood pedagogy, there is
however, to our knowledge, not earlier given much attention to the pedagogics of
‘exploration’ in Fröbel’s texts. This chapter will add to body of knowledge that
find new interpretations and inspirations in historical roots of pedagogy. The
main question we explore in this chapter is: How does the practice of
‘exploration’ appear in Friedrich Fröbel’s texts from the perspective of a
Fröbelian ‘third space’? We have selected two texts for this purpose: The
Education of Man (Fröbel, Die Menschenerziehung, die Erziehungs-, Unterrichts-
und Lehrkunst, angestrebt in der allgemeinen deutschen Erziehungsanstalt zu
Keilhau. (Original manuscript). Bayerische Statsbibliotek, Leipzig, 1826, The
education of man, trans Jarvis J. A. Lovell &amp; Company, New York, 1885, The
education of man, trans Hailmann WN. University Press of the Pacific, Honolulu
(Original work published 1885), 2005) and Pedagogics of the Kindergarten
(Fröbel, Fredrich Fröbel’s pedagogics of the kindergarten, or, his ideas
concerning the play and playthings of the child, trans Jarvis J, vol 30. D.
Appleton and Company, New York, 1909) . This chapter see texts as a mediated
artefact that creates conditions for thinking, understanding and practice, and
thereby one of many conditions for what kinds of activities kindergarten
teachers and children are allowed and encouraged to do. We will give special
attention to how activities are articulated and proposed as explorative practice
in classical texts by Fröbel, and we will also draw on the narrative of a
Norwegian kindergarten teacher who grew up attending a Fröbelian kindergarten as
a child and in order to illustrate exploration as a pedagogy of a third space .
We will trace and discuss how Fröbel’s ideas and ideals meet past and current
educational challenges for the kindergarten teacher and we will argue for
exploration in early years’ pedagogy for the future.
