Title: Role of Drama Skills in Regulating Students’ Behaviour in Secondary Schools in Central Region, Kenya
Authors: Zachary N. Ndwiga, Rebecca Wachira, Wambugu Pachomius
ID: openalex.W3108521569
URL: https://doi.org/10.6007/ijarped/v9-i2/7617

Discipline among students is very important to their academic performance and,
therefore, management of discipline in the learning environment is vital for
better learning outcomes. In the recent past, inculcating discipline among
students has been the subject of debate among scholars with some suggesting that
disciplinary policies simply do not have different effects and that they do not
prevent students' future misbehaviour. As an alternative route to discipline
management, involving students in performing arts such as drama activities has
been assumed to lead to better disciplinary outcomes. However, this has not been
determined in the context of secondary schools in Kenya. The purpose of the
study, therefore, was to determine effectiveness of drama skills strategy in
regulating students' behaviour in secondary schools in Central Region, Kenya.
The study was guided by Canter's Assertive Model. The study used descriptive
survey design. The target population was 83 deputy principals, 79 drama
teachers, and 1888 both drama and non-drama secondary school students in Central
Region, Kenya. Stratified sampling was used to get a representative sample size
of students. Data was collected from the respondents using questionnaires.
Pretesting of instruments was done in schools from Laikipia County. The study
used both qualitative and quantitative methods. The quantitative data was
analysed using descriptive and inferential statistical techniques with the aid
of Statistical Package for Social Scientists (SPSS) and then interpreted and
discussed. The study found that the relationship between drama skills regulating
and students' behaviour in secondary schools in Central Region, Kenya was
statistically significant. The study therefore recommends that; there is need to
encourage and support drama activities in all learning institutions. Finally,
school administrators should encourage public speaking through social and
academic forums.
