Title: THE IMPORTANCE OF THE INITIAL POSTPARTUM/ POSTNATAL HOUR AND SKIN-TO-SKIN CONTACT – A TIME FOR CHANGE IN BULGARIA.
Authors: Ivanichka Serbezova, Daniela Lyutakova
ID: openalex.W3109210161
URL: https://doi.org/10.12955/pmp.v1.104

INTRODUCTION: This paper explores the practices surrounding skin-to-skin contact
of mother and child immediately after birth within Bulgarian maternity wards and
describes women`s experiences. It takes into consideration the research of
Bulgarian experts in breastfeeding and contemporary recommendations for
postnatal care worldwide. Obstetric practices in local maternity wards are
reviewed and evidenced by the research findings. The results put into
perspective the different experiences that Bulgarian mothers have in local
wards, and the authors explore these women`s attitudes towards the routine
implementation of skin-to-skin contact in postnatal care. The paper also
outlines setbacks for introducing the practice in Bulgarian maternity wards due
to the lack of midwife-led care and the importance of specialized care in
optimizing health and a better understanding of skin-to-skin care. OBJECTIVES:
Purposes of this research are: (1) to explore women’s knowledge about skin-to-
skin benefits, including their past experiences with the practice, and (2) to
assess their own personal motivation and willingness to engage in the practice
themselves. METHODS: The methodology applied includes an online-based anonymous
survey that aims to explore parents’ current levels of knowledge and gather
their viewpoints regarding the practice. The research has been conducted on
social media channels between the 26th of January 2020 and the 26th of February
2020 and includes women from varying local parent support groups: both
respondents from a focus group, the area of Ruse, Bulgaria, and respondents from
other major Bulgarian cities. The research findings are illustrated herein, and
the authors discuss attitudes, as evidenced by the respondents’ opinions,
expressed through the survey. RESULTS: A total of 771 cases are included, which
come from both groups. The research demonstrates common practices in local
hospital wards are inconsistent with WHO recommendations and evidence-based
medicine. Skin-to-skin care is practically a non-existent practice within
immediate postnatal care, with most mothers separated from their baby during
this crucial first hour(s). Almost all the women surveyed are willing to engage
in, and embrace, skin-to-skin practices to be introduced as part of the routine
within local maternity wards. CONCLUSION: Midwives’ numbers in hospitals are
dwindling, and women identify this is a worrying trend for the success of skin-
to-skin bonding for new mothers. Evidence-based medical research and parental
opinion compel us to rethink current postnatal practices, and therefore it is
logical to suggest sustainable and realistic strategies for promoting and
implementation of effective guidelines.
