Title: <i>The Plague</i> by Albert Camus, the COVID-19 Pandemic, and the Role of Social Psychiatry – Lessons Shared, Lessons Learned
Authors: Debasish Basu
ID: openalex.W3093327255
URL: https://doi.org/10.4103/wsp.wsp_67_20

“Indeed, we all were up against the wall that plague had built around us, and in
its lethal shadow we must work out our salvation.” –Albert Camus, The Plague[1]
Albert Camus, the Nobel prize-winning French philosopher–writer, published his
book “La Peste” (The Plague) in 1947, describing a plague epidemic in the 1940s
in the French Algerian town of Oran. He described, through his “absurdist”
philosophical lens, the various reactions of the people afflicted with the
plague. Complex psychosocial factors play a very major role in shaping the flow,
the destiny, and the philosophy of this classic novel. More than 70 years later,
as we start writing this piece, on June 8, 2020, the numbers have just crossed
seven millions. That's for the infected ones. For those who are dead: just
crossed four hundred thousand. By the time this editorial would be completed,
the numbers will have increased many more (see postscript). And yet, these are
just numbers. Statistics. The world is full of statistics and numbers. Of
course, we are talking about the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic –
a term now familiar to most of the human inhabitants of our planet. Although
pandemics are not new – and there have been more lethal ones in the past – this
is the one the world is witnessing now. THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC AND MENTAL HEALTH
That the COVID-19 pandemic is sending global shockwaves regarding health,
mortality, morbidity, and disruption in the socio-cultural, economic, and
political rhythms of life is almost an understatement now. It is now also
getting rapidly established what a tremendous toll it has been taking on the
mental health of people. Starting from the early quick surveys, there is already
a sizable – and very rapidly expanding – database on the mental health issues of
people afflicted with, or working with, COVID-19 (not necessarily rigorously
defined mental disorders but usually screening–instrument-based psychological
distress markers or symptoms). There are, in fact, now a number of surveys,
reviews, and early meta-analyses available on the subject. The major strands of
findings, so far, seem to be as follows:[2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10] There is a high
level of psychological distress and morbidity in healthcare workers, especially
those healthcare and other workers working in the frontline or first responders,
related to apprehension and living difficulties There is not much evidence of
neuropsychiatric morbidity other than delirium in the acute phase of those
suffering from COVID-19, although later there may be risk of several mental
disorders A third group of reviews have found substantive psychological issues
in those living under quarantine as “suspects” The fourth group are about those
whose near and dear ones have died due to the infection and often incomplete
grieving due to barriers and restrictions even after death A fifth and often
neglected group is those already with preexisting mental disorders, especially
those with severe mental illnesses Finally, a last (and the largest) group are
persons from the general population who belong to neither of the groups above
but nonetheless have been living under the “shadow” of the pandemic, especially
those experiencing the isolation of a stringent lockdown or its severe economic
repercussions. Of course, all these are early studies (and many of them just
archived preprints at this stage, without peer review), but, together, they
indeed emphasize the need of focusing on the mental health aspects of the
pandemic as well. In fact, although relatively ignored earlier, this need has
been adequately flagged up now by several agencies, including the United Nations
(UN), the World Health Organization (WHO), and the World Psychiatric Association
(WPA). The UN, in its recently released “Policy Brief – COVID-19 and the Need
for Action on Mental Health,” sums it up quite succinctly: “Although the
COVID-19 crisis is, in the first instance, a physical health crisis, it has the
seeds of a major mental health crisis as well, if action is not taken.” Good
mental health is critical to the functioning of society at the best of times. It
must be front and center of every country's response to and recovery from the
COVID-19 pandemic. The mental health and well-being of whole societies have been
severely impacted by this crisis and are a priority to be addressed
urgently.”[11] The WHO Director-General similarly emphasized the need for
“Addressing mental health needs: An integral part of COVID-19 response” in the
latest editorial of World Psychiatry.[12] Finally, the WPA has issued a Position
Statement that underlines the specific role of a psychiatrist.[13] Many have
feared that the mental health consequences and concerns of the pandemic will
themselves constitute a “pandemic within a pandemic,” or a “tsunami.”[14,15] The
figures have varied widely depending upon the study populations, mental health
issues studied, methods of detection, and several other parameters; however,
overall, they are impressive and scary. A number of articles, advisories, and
guidelines have already been published on how to minimize or mitigate these
adverse mental health consequences.[9,15,16] THE OBVIOUS QUESTION: HOW IS SOCIAL
PSYCHIATRY RELEVANT? Therefore, the obvious question for those of us interested
in social psychiatry: What is the role of social psychiatry here? And, more
importantly, what can social psychiatry offer? To answer these questions, let us
try to understand the genesis of the total rubric of the problems. If mental
health issues represent the “outcome variable,” what all are the “independent
variables?” Well, the obvious fact is that there would be no COVID-19 without
that SARS-CoV-2 virus and its physical sequelae on various body systems
(including the central nervous system). That may explain a small part of the
mental health issues faced by those infected by the virus, along with the
obvious psychological threats, anxieties and difficulties faced by the
isolation, and treatment and complications of the treatment. It may also partly
explain the significant mental health issues faced by those who have recovered
from the clinically symptomatic infection, as an aftermath. However, as
mentioned above, the huge shadow of mental health aspects of the pandemic are
not faced by those infected but by those who are, as of now, not infected though
living with the proverbial Damocles' sword hanging over their head, or those who
are more concerned with their survival from financial hardship at the moment
than from the viral infection! The word “social” appears in two very distinct
contexts in this perspective: “social” distancing (which is a misnomer –
physical distancing should be the correct phrase – but, it does capture the
social element inherent in this distancing) and social determinants of health
(including mental health, of course). Both these are directly concerned with
social psychiatry because both have mental health consequences, but one goes
downstream and the other comes from upstream. A third context that we wish to
introduce here is the phrase “social concomitant” or “social infection,” which
works at a parallel level. Let us explain, with the help of a tentative diagram
[Figure 1].Figure 1: COVID-19 and mental health outcomes: The role of social
psychiatrySOCIAL DISTANCING AND MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES “Thus, the first thing that
plague brought to our town was exile. And then we realized that the separation
was destined to continue, we had no choice but to come to terms with the days
ahead……….“ “What do they do with themselves all day?” Tarrou asked Rambert.
“Nothing.” Almost all, indeed, had empty hands and idly dangling arms. Another
curious thing about this multitude of derelicts was its silence. “When they
first came there was such a din you couldn't hear yourself speak,” Rambert said.
“But as the days went by they grew quieter and quieter.” Everyone Tarrou set
eyes on had that vacant gaze and was visibly suffering from the complete break
with all that life had meant to him. And since they could not be thinking of
their death all the time, they thought of nothing. They were on vacation. “But
worst of all,” Tarrou writes, “is that they're forgotten, and they know it.”[1]
Social distancing, in its broadest sense, comprises all those measures taken to
minimize transmission of the infection in the society. It encompasses such
simple measures as the “6-feet/2 m rule,” to more restrictive solutions, such as
isolation (for those already infected) or quarantine (for those not yet infected
but at a tangible risk), to more drastic measures adopted during a total
lockdown, such as complete closure of almost all shopping, travel, and social,
recreational, and religious gatherings. These are understandably, to a varying
degree, associated with a sense of social isolation and alienation, which can
further exacerbate the mental health issues of those especially with preexisting
mental illnesses or those living alone, separated from family due to job and now
unable to return, just to give a few examples. Some “remedies” include constant
social messaging or use of social and electronic media, which, though beneficial
in general, might have adverse consequences if carried out to an extreme. The
obvious and common fallouts of such broadly defined social-defined measures
include depression/demoralization, anxiety (of various sorts), sleep disorders,
substance misuse or exacerbation of disorder, and also, delirium during acute
infection or posttraumatic stress disorder after physical recovery. In rare
cases, suicides or suicidal attempts have been reported.[17] These are the
obvious repercussions of the social distancing and hence constitute the
“downstream” effects. Domestic or other interpersonal abuse or violence is
another documented serious fallout of these measures.[18] ECO-SOCIAL AND
STRUCTURAL DETERMINANTS “The result was that poor families were in great
straits, while the rich went short of practically nothing. Thus, whereas plague
by its impartial ministrations should have promoted equality among our
townsfolk, it now had the opposite effect and, thanks to the habitual conflict
of cupidities, exacerbated the sense of injustice rankling in men's hearts.”[1]
In contrast to the downstream effects of social distancing on mental health, the
“upstream” factors are the social determinants of (mental) health, famously
defined as “circumstances in which people are born, grow, live, work, and age.
These conditions are influenced by the distribution of money, power, and
resources operating at global, national, and local levels.”[19] This is where
social psychiatry comes to the forefront. Human beings have always been divided,
on the basis of umpteen numbers of real or, more commonly, artificial
boundaries: world region, country, regions within countries, economy, class,
color, race, ethnicity, gender, age, language, history, culture, caste, work,
healthcare systems, and access, among others. These divisions determine many
aspects of health, including mental health. These divisions may operate at
different levels: global, regional, macro, medium, small, and micro. Whereas
divisions are not necessarily bad (some of them are unavoidable, pragmatic, or
even useful), it is when discrimination and inequity (unjustness, unfairness)
are implied or created by these divisions they become undesirable, unethical, or
maladaptive. Social psychiatry has since long studied the role of explanatory
theories, such as “social causation” and “social drift,” in explaining excess
mental illnesses in the lower socio-economic strata, for example. These
divisions, with their consequent discrimination and inequity, have been a part
of human history, and it is safe to presume that they will always remain in
different and evolving shapes and sizes. What every disaster, natural or
artificial, does is to re-ignite the lamp of recognition in the darkness of
oblivion. Every disaster unmasks the obvious by bringing in sharper focus these
discriminatory divisions and by amplifying them. The larger the scale of the
disaster, the larger is its unmasking and amplifying effect. Moreover, the
COVID-19 pandemic, by every conceivable means, is one of the largest disasters
in at least a hundred years! There is an apparent paradox that needs to be
clarified first. As asked in a recent editorial, the question arises: is the
virus responsible for the COVID-19 pandemic racist?[20] The obvious answer is,
of course, no! Nor is it anti-poor, anti-black, or anti-ethnic minorities. So
far, it has not shown any specific predilection – nor any specific resistance –
to infect anyone based on any of these divisions alluded to above. Then, how or
why should these social–environmental factors be important or indeed relevant
for health-related (including mental health) issues during this pandemic? The
answer to this apparent paradox is simple, yet profound. When a member of any
disadvantaged group is excessively posted for direct high-risk exposure-related
work, when a poor person lacks the money or the insurance to pay for the
treatment access or costs, when a migrant laborer working in the unsecured
informal sector starts “reverse migration” walking thousands of miles after
losing the day-paid job, when a person belonging to a particular country is
jeered at or abused simply because of one's country-of-origin, when a person is
mocked or scoffed at simply because she/he looks likeone from a particular
country, when a person of a particular background or income level is more
harshly treated by the police for violating lockdown than another from a
different background or income level, when the police is warned by an
influential political leader because he/she happened to warn him/her for
violating social distancing, when an opioid-dependent person cannot obtain his
buprenorphine tablet because of lack of access imposed by lockdown and inability
to buy it from the private sector (with resultant relapse)……. and in many, many
such circumstances which could easily fill up this entire editorial, the “social
determinants” of health including mental health can be clearly seen to operate,
as the mediating or modulating variables, between the pandemic and the resultant
mental health issues. The HIV pandemic was dubbed as the “Pandemic of the
poor.”[21] Perhaps, this is true for the current pandemic as well. At least, it
clearly hits the poorer the harder, economically, socially, physically, and
mentally. Many of these issues have been highlighted, but many remain to be
further searched for, documented, highlighted, and mitigated. If social
psychiatry does not do this, who will? As Mr. Barack Obama, former President of
the USA said in his recent Commencement Speech: “This pandemic has shaken up the
status quo and a of our country's – from economic to to a lack of health for
people who need a of people up to the fact that the of just that it how much
money you if around you is and and that our society and our work when we not
just about but about This is also important for As a in with a familiar of the
our need to the social and economic conditions that to poor mental health. A who
has job and cannot family will from a such as social will do to the anxiety of a
in constant of out of by for a or abused or even by who have been new to police
social SOCIAL “The to with the at all If one was to what one in our was of and
in a town upon in which could be no one had about the by the To a correct about
the and about by our you had to one of the quarantine or isolation established
by our A but of the social determinants could be the role of social Social is a
while it can be a tremendous in quick and of and it can also be the by and
widely and and of them or As above in of the role of social of his the in social
often other than and More these can also and even That is what the “social of
the pandemic, with effect on mental health. SOCIAL common that you may the
disease to you without and of a moment of on part to infect people who are by
the that when they least it plague may its on their and is, about to do so at
the very moment when one is on safe and This sense of is a of every pandemic,
which is by the and its consequences, which are However, it is and by social
psychological Thus, the third and, we the most context in which social
psychiatry relevant for the pandemic, is the related group of factors we to the
“social or “social As was said – was a social If determinants the as and social
distancing the to as then the social may be thought of as the mediating These
social many not in the in after in the said may infect all of the or the
frontline workers for not the family their a from because comes from a
particular or of simply because they are not agencies, or you The at all indeed,
at all distribution COVID-19 anxiety on this discrimination in a sense – the of
the and more more and more There is a in the of this often by the of the social
They are and and – a of the social determinants and of social distancing often
the of social for the tremendous and the people. we the term “social a fallout
of the pandemic that often in mental health issues by those by studies have the
mental health and, very importantly, the between the This is one of the many of
social psychiatry in If social psychiatry is integral to the among COVID-19
pandemic, and mental health and if it appears to have for both and then the
obvious question arises: what can an on social psychiatry do about More what can
SOCIAL PSYCHIATRY do about The answer is we do what we are to up a A by and try
to the from all over the understand and the alluded to above, and for the and of
social to mental health issues and what can be about In and And this is what
this to This is a global of from all the of the from many of the focusing on
their social and There are several in this of the this editorial, there is the
World Association of Social Position Statement on COVID-19 pandemic, and the
role of in the in this is an important by focusing on the between social and
from very persons in the world on the Position the The of up the real of this
The of important issues The more on or The concerns with the and the The though
more in does upon the that COVID-19 has brought upon This is by a on and of
mental healthcare during a Brief on a to the and two relevant to one on need for
more and another on These are by the to two of our past who during this in all,
we have to what is and, more importantly, what is through this about this
pandemic and the role of social psychiatry: that this will the much in this
However, in the to Albert just the plague in his every pandemic is also a
pandemic of the and of the where the seeds of when in the conditions by the and
and by the social of various of discrimination and rapidly the of with economic,
social, and mental adverse effects. This is what the at the of the “The plague
or for The them are when the conditions are The virus, in this sense, is a but
not the of the pandemic and its mental health need social psychiatry now we have
it the plague or for that it can for years and years in and that it its time in
and and that the would come for the and the of it would up its and them to in a
the of sending the of this editorial to the figures at the of this to and And,
this
