Title: Ancient Greece. From the Mycenaean Palaces to the Age of Homer
Authors: Sigrid Deger-Jalkotzy, Irene S. Lemos
ID: openalex.W631491031
URL: https://doi.org/10.1553/0x003b4150

The rich corpus of Sigrid Deger-Jalkotzy’s writings is devoted to a wide range
of topics concerning the societies of early Greece from very different
perspectives and with the help of all available sources. Her work begins with
studies of Homeric forms of rulership, followed by her examination of Mycenaean
Linear B texts on social structure and land ownership. Through the
archaeological evidence she has approached the post-palatial period of Mycenaean
Greece and has contributed in many studies to a fundamental understanding of
this important transformative phase of the Bronze Age world into that of the
Early Iron Age. This includes the study of two particular sites of this period
(12th–10th century BC) advancing the knowledge of lesser-known regions. One is
the late Mycenaean settlement on the Acropolis of Aigeira in the region of
Achaia on the Corinthian Gulf, the other the Mycenaean chamber tomb cemetery at
Elateia in Central Greece, where she worked together with Phanouria Dakoronia.
Sigrid Deger-Jalkotzy has also been a prolific organiser of conferences
(frequently together with other colleagues) that were dedicated to Linear B
studies, the Late Helladic (LH) IIIC period of the 12th and early 11th century
BC and the Early Iron Age (middle of the 11th to end of 8th century BC). Not
only did she bring together renowned scholars in the field discussing current
academic topics, but she also managed to publish the important volumes in a
short time after the conferences and thus make them accessible to a broader
academic public. She has co-organised also other conferences in her various
prominent roles in the hierarchy of the Austrian Academy of Sciences. We wish to
make her rich oeuvre available to a broad public, who will certainly appreciate
the open access. We have organised the writings of Sigrid Deger-Jalkotzy into
sections that cover the Late Bronze Age Aegean, Linear B, LH IIIC and the Early
Iron Age, Aigeira, Elateia, editorship, and finally obituaries and laudations.
We would like to thank the Austrian Academy of Sciences Press for their
cooperation and support and the various publishing houses for granting
reproduction permits. Furthermore, we are grateful for the support of the OREA
team, especially Bibiana Dernec for her support in obtaining publication rights
as well as Natalie Savic and Valentin Jovanovic for generating the pdf-files.
Birgitta Eder and Ulrike Schuh Vienna, 3rd Feb. 2020
