Title: From an experimental paper to a playful screen: How the essence of materiality modulates the process of creation
Authors: Sara Sintonen
ID: openalex.W3005356101
URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12906

Abstract The article seeks to develop a better understanding of the contribution
of materiality in a discourse between a creator (content producer) and an
interface, dealing with analogue and digital artefacts. Focus is in the
materiality of the two different art‐creation learning processes, acrylic
painting and digital painting. The objective of this paper is to consider
especially the affect and meaning of these two different content creation
modalities and intra‐action within that. Through reflective autoethnographic
consideration, the purpose is to consider the essences of materials manifesting
and modulating the processes of content creation as a posthumanist phenomenon.
It will be shown that the creation processes with paper are more experimental
whereas the processes with digital screen are more playful. There is a growing
need to deeper understand the cultural change of material cultures and the
people’s intra‐action with the materials also enabling arts creation. This paper
will widen our limited understanding and deepen our theoretical perspectives of
the essence of materials which then avails confronting analogue and digital when
developing teaching and learning in the posthuman era especially in early
education. Practitioner Notes What is already known about this topic There is a
growing interest in the new materialism and posthuman thinking amongst
educational technology research and development. Reading analogue versus digital
is well‐documented. What this paper adds New materialist thinking offers a
useful perspective in education for looking at the essence of analogue and
digital materiality modulating content creation. Characterising the nuances in
analogue and digital production can help in evaluating their educational
potential. Implications for practice and/or policy As practitioners we should
critically question the political vision of education digitalisation especially
concerning early childhood education. There is a need to move beyond debates
about analogue versus digital to look at more specific examples of their
advantages (and disadvantages) in developing posthumanist education and
intra‐active pedagogy especially for young children.
