Title: A strange situation indeed: Fostering leader–follower attachment security during unprecedented crisis
Authors: Amanda S. Hinojosa, Megan J. Doughty Shaine, Kelly Davis McCauley
ID: openalex.W3100126816
URL: https://doi.org/10.1108/md-08-2020-1142

Purpose We discuss how attachment theory can help leaders maintain security in
their relationships with followers during crisis, using the COVID-19 worldwide
pandemic as an example. We describe how the COVID-19 pandemic has undermined the
typical ways leaders may have fostered secure relationships with their
followers. Guided by Lewin's action research paradigm, we integrate research on
attachment theory with recent research on the COVID-19 pandemic to present
leader interventions to maintain attachment security in spite of the disruption
caused by COVID-19. We then discuss how these propositions can guide leader
interventions in other types of crisis. Design/methodology/approach Attachment
theory has received considerable attention in recent years from management and
leadership scholars. We extend this line of inquiry by drawing parallels between
the strange situation, a now classic paradigm for researching infant–caregiver
attachment systems, to understand attachment security in leader–follower
relationships during times of crisis. Findings We find that the crises such as
COVID-19 present a challenge to attachment security in leader–follower
relationships. We also find that research on adult attachment in response to
crises and traumatic events is relevant to understanding how leaders can foster
positive relations with followers during times of crisis when physical proximity
is not possible. Originality/value We apply attachment theory and leadership
research to present a framework for leadership during the COVID-19 pandemic;
however, many of our theoretical assertions and related interventions could be
applied to other unprecedented crises that disrupt leader–follower
relationships. Hence, our paper offers a unique lens that is centered on the
attachment security within the leader–follower relationship during crisis.
