Title: Reframing the ordinary: cyberspace and education
Authors: Rebecca Mace
ID: openalex.W3025237703
URL: https://doi.org/10.14201/teri.22473

In an era dominated by social media, reportedly more concerned with self-
expression than self-reflection, the classical injunction to ‘Know Thyself’ has
renewed purchase. Increased self-knowledge on the whole enables a student to
become more self-determining by exercising a choice, a ‘freedom to be’ that is
central to the human condition. Identity construction, development and formation
are all considered important functions within education, and many teachers adopt
a pedagogical approach that stimulates adolescents to connect what they are
taught to who they are and want to be. However, much of this development of
self-knowledge takes place in non-formal learning environments, be they co-
curricular clubs or activities outside of school. It is my contention that
social media offers as much in terms of exploring new identity positions as
these more traditional locations for self-learning. Although many do not feel a
need to articulate and share in order to believe they are present in the world
there are an increasing number of those, who believe that to be is to be
perceived through online expression. Rather than focusing upon the envy inducing
‘Perfect Me’ posts that are so often linked to the decline in adolescent mental
health and wellbeing, this paper explores how mundane and banal posts on social
media can be used to frame and reframe aspects of modern life which in turn
promotes self-learning. By drawing attention to the average, everydayness of
existence, the relationship between the seemingly ordinary and self-knowledge
becomes more apparent. This paper considers the potential individuals have for
coming to know themselves a little more deeply as they move through a process of
self expression, to self curation, to self construal, to self construction.
Rather than asking ‘What is it to be in the [online] world?’ it poses the
slightly different question: ‘What is it to present being?’. It also considers
the space between these two questions as offering potential for fostering the
wider educational ideal, that of greater self-knowledge.
