Title: Individualization of selection and training of female athletes in speed-power athletics from the perspective of gender identity
Authors: Evgeniy Vrublevskiy, Anatoly Skrypko, Ryszard Asienkiewicz
ID: openalex.W3081173843
URL: https://doi.org/10.15561/10.15561/20755279.2020.0405

Background and Study Aim. To develop and justify the criteria for morphogenetic
markers of speed-power abilities of athletes and the main directions of
individualization of the process of their preparation, taking into account the
characteristics of the female body. Material and Methods. Using the “2D: 4D”
determination methodology, finger proportions were analysed for 126 qualified
athletes specializing in speed-strength types (sprinting and hurdling, jumping,
shot-putting) of different ages (from 17 to 25 years old). For 13 weeks, eight
qualified short-distance student runners were regularly tested using computer
strain gauge equipment: 5 masculine and 3 feminine types. The tensodynamograms
of the manifestation of the strength of muscle groups carrying the main load in
the structure of the sprint run were recorded and processed. Results. It was
found that 78% of the examined athletes observed finger proportions close to the
"male" proportions. This may indicate their certain masculinization. The
technique used for this can be an informative and simple marker to predict a
genetic predisposition to the ability of effective performance of speed-power
work. It was determined that the same amount of power load causes masculine
athletes, runners for short distances, a more significant deployment of long-
term adaptation restructuring of masculine athletes, runners for short
distances, compared with athletes of a different gender identity. Conclusions.
Criteria for the prognostic assessment of speed-power abilities of athletes
based on simple biological markers for testing and identification, like finger
proportions (2D: 4D), have been developed. For athletes of high qualification
who have a gender identity similar to men and a masculine somatotype, it is
possible to use adapted male techniques for training.
