Title: The challenge of monoculturalism: what books are educators sharing with children and what messages do they send?
Authors: Helen Adam, Caroline Barratt-Pugh
ID: openalex.W3005062941
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s13384-019-00375-7

Abstract The importance of recognising, valuing and respecting a child’s family,
culture, language and values is increasingly articulated in educational policy.
Diversity and inclusion are central themes of the guiding principles of early
childhood education and care in Australia. Children’s literature can be a
powerful tool for extending children’s knowledge and understandings of
themselves and others who may be different culturally, socially or historically.
However, evidence suggests many settings provide monocultural book collections
which are counterproductive to principles of diversity. This paper reports on a
larger study investigating factors and relationships influencing the use of
children’s literature to support principles of cultural diversity in the
kindergarten rooms of long day care centres. The study was conducted within an
ontological perspective of constructivism and an epistemological perspective of
interpretivism informed by sociocultural theory. A mixed methods approach was
adopted and convergent design was employed to interpret significant
relationships and their meanings. Twenty-four educators and 110 children from
four long day care centres in Western Australia participated. Data were
collected through semi-structured interviews, video-based observations, field
notes, document analysis and a book audit. This study identified that current
book collections in these four kindergarten rooms of long day care centres
promote monocultural viewpoints and ‘othering’ of minority groups through
limited access to books portraying inclusive and authentic cultural diversity.
These findings have important social justice implications. The outcomes of this
study have implications for educators, policy makers, early childhood
organisations and those providing higher education and training for early
childhood educators.
