Title: Through the kaleidoscope : a common worlds attunement to lively child-place relationships
Authors: Nancy van Groll
ID: openalex.W3016367753
URL: https://doi.org/10.14288/1.0389813

Contextualizing early childhood pedagogies within the 21st century requires a
readjustment of the lens through which early childhood education (ECE) is viewed
and enacted. Provoked by Taylor and Pacini-Ketchabaw’s (2015) statement that “we
can no longer afford the illusion of our separateness from the rest of the
natural world” (p. 45), this thesis seeks to untangle and re-tangle the
complexities of reconfiguring human relationships with(in) the places we
inhabit, experience and hold as meaningful. I look to reconceptualize what early
childhood pedagogy might look like in the Anthropocene if educators and children
attune to our relationships with(in) place. Explorations into the pedagogical
possibilities of enacting place-conscious practices are innovative research
engagements that make visible ways of living and learning reciprocally in times
of climate precarity. A variety of theoretical and epistemological traditions
such as developmental and environmental psychology; ecojustice and
sustainability initiatives; and postcolonial, feminist and Indigenous research,
are critically analyzed in order to deconstruct romanticized and capitalistic
assumptions of nature as pedagogical or developmental resource. Using a
narrative methodological approach informed by a common worlds theoretical
framework, research was undertaken with four four-year-old children at a forest
preschool in British Columbia to surface and assemble rich, detailed and
relational insight into place-child relationships. Data were collected using
pedagogical narration and conversive wayfinding and analyzed from a lively
storytelling approach conceptualized as a spiral of attunement. The stories
created and retold offer an opportunity to disrupt artificial nature/culture
binaries embedded in ECE practices, to assemble place-conscious pedagogies that
resist anthropocentrism, and to reconceptualize methodological approaches to
early childhood studies. Opportunities to re-examine the ethical
responsibilities of 21st century early childhood educators and to expand common
notions of well-being to be inclusive to more-than-human community members are
suggested. Learnings could ultimately inform early childhood educators while
they make pedagogical choices, inspire researchers to examine similar questions,
and motivate policy makers to reconsider what is important in decision-making in
the early years.
