Title: Integrating Children’s Literature into Occupational Learning about Engineers
Authors: Brianna Dorie, Monica Cardella
ID: openalex.W2213632112
URL: https://doi.org/10.18260/1-2--18214

Abstract Integrating Children's Literature into Occupational Learning about
Engineers At a very young age, a child has the ability to formulate ideas
regarding the occupation ofa lawyer, a nurse or even a doctor. However, studies
have shown that most children have limitedinformation regarding engineers, and
the lack of knowledge can often perpetuate into adulthood(Cunningham et al.,
2005; NAE, 2002). Augur et al. (2005) found that "occupational aspirationsand
expectations of children undergo dramatic development changes during the
elementaryyears, as well as resisting change in other respects." This means
prior to school education,children have already formed their perception of
occupations and that stereotypical attributeshave already been firmly
established. Therefore, it is important to introduce occupations, suchas
engineering, at a very early age typically before a child enters school. Few
studies have looked at the influence of media on the career development of
children,though it has been implied as the primary source of occupational
learning (Watson & McMahon,2005). Media in the case of children includes the
influence of television, toys, and literature(books, newspaper, magazines,
etc.). Fictional story books are a compelling medium forintroducing concepts to
children at a young age, as it can present new information in an engagingway,
increase the stimulation of the imagination and deliver messages. However, while
thenotions of doctor, teacher and firefighter are ubiquitous in young
literature, there is a lack ofengagement about engineers (Holbrook et al.,
2008). A search of children's literature, using multiple methods, found six
books pertaining toengineering, four narrative storybooks, an autobiography, and
a tradebook (non-fiction). Thesebooks were analyzed for (1) common
misconceptions in engineering, (2) thematic analysis ofmessages, (3) integration
of problem-solving ability, and (4) implications for learning in and outof
classroom. The misconceptions observed were derived out of the author's lack of
knowledgeregarding engineering, and often were associated with mismatched
identities (i.e. an engineeroperates a train). Messages included the application
of math and science as tools for engineersand the concept that engineers impact
the world around them. Problem solving ability wasevidenced through main
character interaction when faced with a challenge. A broader approach looking at
children's narrative stories investigated embeddedengineering themes in popular
stories. This examination revealed that many popular children'sstories
communicated concepts relevant to engineering, although engineering was not
explicitlydescribed or discussed. These concepts included problem solving,
multiple alternatives, andspatial conceptualization. Integrating children's
books with either direct engineer references oreven using popular books
containing implicit engineering concepts has implications for learningin both
formal and informal environments.ReferencesAuger, R.W., Blackhurst, A.E. & Wahl,
K.H. (2005). The Development of Elementary-aged Children's Career Aspirations
and Expectations. School Counselor 8(4): 322-329.Cunningham, C.M., Lachapelle,
C., and A. Lindgren-Streicher (2005). Assessing Elementary School Students'
Conceptions of Engineering and Technology. In Proceedings: American Society of
Engineering Education. Portland, OR.Holbrook, A., Panozza, L., and E. Prieto
(2008). Engineering in Children's Fiction – Not a Good Story? International
Journal of Science and Mathematics Education 7: 723-740.NAE (National Academy of
Engineering), (2002). Raising public awareness of engineering. Washington, D.C.:
The National Academies Press.Watson, M., & McMahon, M., (2005). Children's
Career Development: A Research Review from a Learning Perspective. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 67(2): 119-132.
