Title: Narratives of Adoption
Authors: Andrea Rucska, Anna Perge
ID: openalex.W3042356398
URL: https://doi.org/10.13189/ujph.2020.080405

In Hungary, the rate of adoption is much lower compared to the number of
children living in institutional care. Adoption provides an opportunity for
ceasing the negative factors in the personality development of children in
institutional care and reaches a better quality of life. The aim of the research
is to reveal whether children's age and the time of adoption affect the
development of personality, regarding the attachment relationship between
children and parents. Additionally, we would like to map how the personality of
adopted children changes after getting to a family, and what the characteristics
of its development are. For the retrospective study, an interview method was
used, it happened by the adopting parents in case of all the ten included
families. The interviews covered the following subjects: the reason for
adoption, thoughts related to children, uncertainty factors in connection with
adoption, acquaintance periods, the events of the family's home and the
difficulties of the family socialization process. The interviews were analyzed
by content analysis. The possibility of adoption came up in most of the families
included in the research after medical interventions and the acceptance of
infertility. The incorrigible and severe health damage of the child was a reason
for exclusion in association with the child to be adopted. Four couples had no
criteria about the origin. All families reported about uncertainty and fear
before adoption. In the moment of adoption, the youngest children were newborns,
and the oldest child was six and a half years old when getting to the adopting
family. In respect of the examined families, the interval between the submission
of the application and getting to the family was between two months and two and
a half years. The initial difficulties were greatly different in the cases of
newborns and children adopted to an older age. Parents defined the first six
weeks as the hardest in case of newborns. The support of the family's background
and friends after adoption could be detected in case of eight families, two
families experienced the rejection of the grandparents. It is indisputable that
adoption as early as possible is the ideal for children. If we know the case
history, in case of experiencing a crisis, the arising problems can be treated
effectively only by teamwork with the parents and the representatives of related
professions. Children have the right to health, a healthy lifestyle, and we
should always strive to create optimal conditions.
