Title: Do Musicians Have Better Mnemonic and Executive Performance Than Actors? Influence of Regular Musical or Theater Practice in Adults and in the Elderly
Authors: Mathilde Groussard, Renaud Coppalle, Thomas Hinault, Hervé Platel
ID: openalex.W3086499339
URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2020.557642

The effects of musical practice on cognition are well established yet rarely
compared with other kinds of artistic training or expertise. This study aims to
compare the possible effect of musical and theater regular practice on cognition
across the lifespan. Both of these artistic activities require many hours of
individual or collective training in order to reach an advanced level. This
process requires the interaction between higher-order cognitive functions and
several sensory modalities (auditory, verbal, visual and motor), as well as
regular learning of new pieces. This study included participants with musical or
theater practice, and healthy controls matched for age (18-84 years old) and
education. The objective was to determine whether specific practice in these
activities had an effect on cognition across the lifespan, and a protective
influence against undesirable cognitive outcomes associated with aging. All
participants underwent a battery of cognitive tasks that evaluated processing
speed, executive function, fluency, working memory, verbal and visual long-term
memories, and non-verbal reasoning abilities. Results showed that music and
theater artistic practices were strongly associated with cognitive enhancements.
Participants with musical practice were better in executive functioning, working
memory and non-verbal reasoning, whereas participants with regular acting
practice had better long-term verbal memory and fluency performance. Thus, taken
together, results suggest a differential effect of these artistic practices on
cognition across the lifespan. Advanced age did not seem to reduce the benefit,
so future studies should focus on the hypothetical protective effects of
artistic practice against cognitive decline.
