Title: An examination of the relationships between vocational identity, hardiness, meaningful work, burnout, and work engagement
Authors: Greg A. Loebel, Dik, Bryan, Chavez, Ernest, Davalos, Deana, Conroy, Samantha
ID: openalex.W3120045915
URL: https://hdl.handle.net/10217/219634

A cross-sectional study was conducted to expand the Job Demands-Resources (JD-R)
model and personal resources within the model. The association between
vocational identity as a personal resource and two criterion variables of
burnout and work engagement were examined in a sample of 255 full-time U.S.
working adults using Amazon's Mechanical Turk to collect survey data. JD-R is
situated within occupational stress research that incorporates burnout and work
engagement as the two primary constructs other variables are related to.
Vocational identity has seen very little research in working adult samples and
has been limited to career development outcomes. Minimal examination has been
conducted of core features of identity within the JD-R model. Therefore, this
study explored vocational identity as a personal resource that predicts burnout
and work engagement, hypothesizing a negative relationship with the former and
positive relationship with the latter. Results indicated vocational identity had
significant main effects on both work engagement and burnout. Additionally, the
perception that one's work is meaningful was examined as an important job
resource hypothesized to explain the relationship between the main predictor and
criterion variables as a mediator. Results also indicated that meaningful work
significantly mediated the direct effects of vocational identity on work
engagement and burnout. Since stress is a natural part of work, one's stress
appraisal and coping style has a significant influence on well-being outcomes.
Hardiness, which is a personality style that influences how one may effectively
cope with stress, is viewed as an important personal resource. It was
hypothesized that hardiness moderated the strength of the direct relationship
between vocational identity and the criterion variables, as well as the strength
of the relationship with the meaningful work mediator. A proposed moderated
mediation model was tested where vocational identity predicted burnout and work
engagement through the mediating relationship of meaningful work. The mediated
effect was expected to be stronger for those higher in hardiness. Results
revealed that hardiness only had a moderating effect on the relationship between
vocational identity and the exhaustion subscale of burnout, but no significant
moderating effect was detected for the other two burnout subscales or any of the
three work engagement subscales. Results also showed no detectable moderating
effect of hardiness on the indirect relationship of vocational identity on work
engagement and burnout through meaningful work.
