Title: Navigating a performance livelihood: career trajectories and transitions for the classical singer
Authors: Kathleen Connell
ID: openalex.W3100755820
URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/14613808.2020.1840537

Investigations pertaining to career trajectories and vocational identities of
professional classical Australian singers are uncharted and lack specific
empirical evidence. Rarely do studies explain the professional singers’
experiences and the processes they undertook to reach goals, to comprehend their
deep identification with the craft, and acknowledge the specific market
conditions which drive their career. This research investigated the careers of
Australian classical singers through a qualitative interview-based study and
analysis, which outlines the trajectory of the professional singers’ careers as
these became evident through their experiences. Extensive interviews were
conducted with 13 retired professional singers’ and the subsequent thematic
analysis found a trajectory of development and decline. Major career theories
and empirical studies from elite dance and sportsperson were interrogated. An
analysis of the singers’ experiences of their professional life was undertaken,
and implications arising were related to career models from the film industry to
discourses from cultural economics and sociology, to music training concepts and
entrepreneurial approaches to working in the creative arts. The result was the
identification of a distinct career typology comprising several stages: (1) pre
career; (2) breaking in; (3) peak stage; (4) denouement; and (5) moving on. The
study found there is a critical link between pre- and post-career stages that
has implications for training. Other findings include that creativity and
identity are tightly intertwined for the professional singers in the study, and
when seeking new directions following the denouement stage, the majority of the
singers attempted to remain attached to an artistic field. The findings suggest
that training for artists’ in career planning, pedagogical practices,
entrepreneurship and attention to issues of wellbeing have often been inadequate
in this industry and it is only in the consideration of the lifecycle of a
creative performance career that the critical link between pre- and post-career
stages can be made.
