Title: FINDING LOVE IN A HOPELESS PLACE: BLACK GIRLS’ TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY SELF-LOVE LITERACIES
Authors: Autumn A. Griffin
ID: openalex.W3083253246
URL: https://drum.lib.umd.edu/handle/1903/26083

This dissertation analyzes how nine adolescent Black girls enact their twenty-
first century literacies (i.e. critical media, multimodal, and digital
literacies) to develop and depict self-love. Building on bell hooks’s (2000)
definition, I define self-love here as the will to extend one’s self for the
purpose of nurturing, celebrating, preserving, or protecting one’s own or
another’s physical, mental, emotional, or spiritual growth. Through the adoption
of Black Feminist, Black Girlhood, and Black Girls’ Literacies I employed
qualitative case study methods and integrated Participatory Action Research
methods to answer the following questions: (1) How do adolescent Black girls
articulate the ways they engage their twenty-first century literacies to develop
self-love? and (2) How do adolescent Black girls use their twenty-first century
literacies to depict self-love multimodally through a range of artifacts? I
designed and executed weekly sessions that facilitated space for the girls to
talk through and write about ideas pertaining to identity and digital media with
regards to self-love for adolescent Black girls. Data from these sessions
include introductory survey results, interview transcripts, partner artifacts
and weekly reflections. Analysis of the data indicates that with regards to
question one adolescent Black girls explained that they (1) manipulate
algorithms; (2) spam the internet; and (3) use digital tools to support their
future goals. Further, the girls employed their twenty-first century literacies
to depict self-love multimodally by engaging such design elements as color,
shape, and spatial location to design a digital homeplace where they could (1)
name themselves and (2) claim space in the digital. This dissertation serves two
purposes: (1) it provides pedagogical tools for educators of Black girls seeking
to facilitate spaces where they can develop their identities and literacies
simultaneously and (2) it details the ways contemporary Black girls engage their
twenty-first century literacies to extend the literacy practices of their
foremothers who used literacy to negotiate and challenge public perceptions
about Black women. The findings from this study contribute not only to the field
of education, but also gender studies and sociology, as they offer insight on
adolescent identity development and formation.
