Title: PENANAMAN NILAI KARAKTER REMAJA MELALUI PERMAINAN TRADISIONAL
Authors: Ery Wati Nurdiana
ID: openalex.W3005523786
URL: https://doi.org/10.47647/jsr.v9i3.159

Teenagers are the successor of the nation that we must prepare all their needs
both physically and spiritually. Becoming a reliable national successor is not
only demanded by high knowledge or extraordinary skills but how to create a
successor of the nation of Indonesia with character ?. The cultivation of
character nowadays is very important and urgent because the influence of the
progress of the globalization era offers many advantages which also have a
negative impact. Humans tend to choose to live individually and are more selfish
and material. Lack of communication with others will make someone difficult to
interact. Cultivation of characters in adolescents can be done through
traditional games, this has been done by Misbach (2006) of the Indonesian
University of Education entitled "The Role of Educative Traditional Games in
Contributing to Forming Nation Character and Identity" His conclusion was
"Traditional games have a role which is very important and the formation of
national character and identity, many traditional games overlap with local
characters and wisdom which become the view of the life of the tribe where these
characters are starting to fade little by little "&#x0D; For this reason
researchers are very interested in conducting research on "The Role of
Traditional Aceh Games in Forming Youth Character" The location of this study is
in Mukim Sungai L abundant, Sukamakmur district. Aceh Besar ... This research
aims to find out the factors that cause the traditional games of Aceh to
disappear and illustrate the values of traditional games in building teenage
characters. This research uses a descriptive approach and qualitative methods.
With the technique of collecting data documentation, observation and interviews.
The subject of this research is teenagers whose level of education is in junior
high school. Data analysis is done by data reduction, data presentation and
drawing conclusions. From the results of research that causes traditional games
to be lost due to lack of socialization from parents, tight school hours and
technological advancements and the characters embedded in these traditional
games are honesty, courage, cooperation, obedience to rules and tolerance&#x0D;
Keywords ; Traditional Game and a teenager Characters.
