Title: International Health Practices: A Multidisciplinary Approach to Therapeutic Mediations With an Artistic Medium Based on the Model of Play
Authors: Anne Brun, Louis Brunet, Denis Cerclet, Antonie Masson, Magali Ravit
ID: openalex.W3007727348
URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00254

This article, corresponding to a part of the restitution of a financed
international research project between France, Brazil, Canada, Italy and
Belgium, aims to offer a modelisation and qualitative evaluation of mediation
care settings based on an original methodological tool that involves identifying
the typical games at the foundations of creativity, following a
multidisciplinary perspective. Therapeutic mediations are settings or devices
organized around a "pliable medium," often artistic, like painting, modeling,
writing and theater, which are very widespread in institutional practices, both
in France and abroad. The scientific objectives of this research consist in a
multi-disciplinary exploration (anthropology, criminology, neuroscience,
clinical psychology) of the process of creative symbolization understood as a
process of transformation involving play. According to this orientation, play
can be defined as a psychic process whereby a subjective experience can be
explored with pleasure, and consequently symbolized and appropriated. Our
fundamental and original hypothesis is that play is at the source of the
creative process, conceived as a work of metabolization by the psyche of playful
experiences during the different stages of life. The review of the understanding
of play in psychoanalysis, anthropology, criminology and neuroscience emphasizes
the richness of this model and the importance of reflecting on the typical games
in the field of psychic care. A clinical example of treatment in a pictorial
therapeutic mediation setting of a child with psychotic disorders makes it
possible to identify a number of typical games as well as the modalities of
interpretation of the therapists through play. These multidisciplinary studies
lead to the presentation of a general table of typical games, and these first
results highlight the richness of identifying typical games in clinical
settings. Ultimately, the multidisciplinary approach shows the interest of the
model of play in the evaluation of therapeutic mediation settings, with a
convergence of the different disciplines emphasizing the pertinence of this
model. The scientific impact of this research overlaps with its societal impact,
through the development of innovative tools for evaluating therapeutic
mediations, in order to take account of the evolution of the different forms of
social expression of psychic suffering.
