Title: Multimodal language and learning: Drama as EAL/D pedagogy in the early primary classroom
Authors: Natasha Elizabeth Beaumont
ID: openalex.W3085175819
URL: https://hdl.handle.net/2123/22696

This paper is a qualitative exploration of the experiences of three English as
an additional language or dialect (EAL/D) Year 1 students and their classroom
teacher. The study interprets their engagement in socio-dramatic roleplay as a
form of oral and written literacy instruction. Analysis centres around the body
language and classroom conversations of participants, as well as the pedagogic
strategies implemented. The methodologies used are hermeneutic phenomenology and
narrative interpretation. Human personalities are impossible to represent using
purely quantitative means. Stories, however, are able to vividly depict complex
psychosocial environments. Classrooms are such an environment, as full of
relationships and feelings as they are of concepts and curriculum. Hence, in
presenting a case for drama as a highly engaging language enrichment pedagogy,
this study has been inspired and informed by the work of Van Manen (2016a,
2016b) and Polkinghorne (1988), both significant contributors to the field of
human experience. This investigation builds upon a growing body of research
demonstrating that drama-rich strategies and techniques are a classroom
innovation that can improve student engagement and learning outcomes. Drama
encourages vocal expressiveness and creative language use. It also allows young
students to use their innate physicality to create and access multimodal
meaning. Multimodality is becoming increasingly valued in the fields of second
language learning and social equity. Finding different ways of representing
knowledge to help support increasingly diverse student populations is now an
acknowledged best practice. Drama utilises body language as an alternative mode
of communication, one that EAL/D students are able to adopt as easily as their
mainstream language peers.
