Title: A Mixed Methods Study to Examine the Influence of CLIL on Physical Education Lessons: Analysis of Social Interactions and Physical Activity Levels
Authors: Celina Salvador-García, Carlos Capella Peris, Òscar Chiva-Bartoll, Pedro Jesús Ruíz-Montero
ID: openalex.W3014003017
URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00578

Physical Education is often selected for applying multilingual initiatives
through the use of a content and language integrated learning (CLIL) approach.
However, it is still unclear whether the introduction of such an approach might
entail losing the essence of physical education and distorting its basic
purposes. The aim of this study is to analyze the impact of CLIL on physical
education lessons. Given the purpose of this study, a mixed methodological
approach based on a sequential exploratory design divided into two different
phases is used. We begin with initial qualitative data collection (phase I),
consisting of the analysis of interviews with 12 participants (8 teachers and 4
students). Based on its analysis, two foci are identified: social relationships
and physical activity. Then, informed by the results obtained, a quantitative
approach is used (phase II), differentiating these two sets of data to make a
more in-depth analysis of them. On the one hand, a sociometric questionnaire was
applied to analyze the social relationships between CLIL students. On the other
hand, a quasi-experimental design (<i>n</i> = 49) was implemented using
accelerometry to measure moderate to vigorous physical activity (MVPA) in the
physical education sessions. Regarding physical activity, the results show that
levels of MVPA are higher in the experimental group (CLIL) than in the control
group, a result which clarifies the divergent viewpoints of the interviewees.
However, focusing on social relationships, the sociometric questionnaire results
show that there were no statistically significative changes, although some signs
of a slight effect on students' relationships arise depending on their gender.
Therefore, more research would be necessary to further study the effect of CLIL
in this regard.
