Title: Exploring the conceptualisation and study of freebirthing as a historical and social phenomenon: a meta-narrative review of diverse research traditions
Authors: Gemma McKenzie, Glenn Robert, Elsa Montgomery
ID: openalex.W3021527228
URL: https://doi.org/10.1136/medhum-2019-011786

Freebirthing is a clandestine practice whereby women intentionally give birth
without healthcare professionals (HCPs) present in countries where there are
medical facilities available to assist them. Women who make this decision are
frequently subjected to stigma and condemnation, yet research on the phenomenon
suggests that women's motivations are often complex. The aim of this review was
to explore how freebirth has been conceptualised over time in the English-
language academic and grey literature. The meta-narrative methodology employed
enables a phenomenon to be understood within and between differing research
traditions, as well as against its social and historical context. Our research
uncovered nine research traditions (nursing, autobiographical text with birthing
philosophy, midwifery, activism, medicine, sociology, law and ethics, pregnancy
and birth advice, and anthropology) originating from eight countries and
spanning the years 1957-2018. Most of the texts were written by women, with the
majority being non-empirical. Empirical studies on freebirth were usually
qualitative, although there were a small number of quantitative medical and
midwifery studies; these texts often focused on women's motivations and
highlighted a range of reasons as to why a woman would decide to give birth
without HCPs present. Motivations frequently related to women's previous
negative maternity experiences and the type of maternity care available, for
example medicalised and hospital-based. The use of the meta-narrative
methodology allowed the origins of freebirth in 1950s America to be traced to
present-day empirical studies of the phenomenon. This highlighted how the
subject and the publication of literature relating to freebirth are embedded
within their social and historical contexts. From its very inception, freebirth
aligns with the medicalisation of childbirth, the position of women in society,
the provision of maternity care and the way in which women experience maternity
services.
