Title: Associations of father’s breastfeeding attitude and support with the duration of exclusive breastfeeding among first-time mothers
Authors: Hui Wen Phua, Nur Aina Afrina Abdul Razak, Nurul Husna Mohd Shukri
ID: openalex.W3177140142
URL: 

Introduction: Initiating and sustaining breastfeeding are influence by many
factors including involvement, attitude and support from the partner. Research
on breastfeeding mostly investigate maternal factors, although the father’s
behaviour and role may influence the success of breastfeeding. Hence, this study
aimed to determine the associations of father’s attitude and support with the
duration of exclusive breastfeeding new parents. Methods: The study involved 104
new parents in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, recruited at three randomly selected
antenatal clinics using purposive sampling. Fathers’ breastfeeding attitude was
measured using Iowa-Infant-Feeding-Attitude-Scale, whereas paternal support
using Subjective Norms and Paternal-Breastfeeding-Influence-Scale
questionnaires. Mothers were asked about breastfeeding practice. Results:
Exclusive breastfeeding duration rates at six months was 27.9%. The average
score for paternal attitude on breastfeeding was 61.0 ±6.3, indicating father’s
positive attitude towards breastfeeding. The mean score of paternal
breastfeeding supports for subjective norms surrounding breastfeeding and
overall support score were 4.3+0.6 and 4.06+0.6, respectively, demonstrating
frequent paternal engaging and support in breastfeeding. Duration of exclusive
breastfeeding were positively associated with the paternal attitude (β=0.235,
p=0.027) and overall mean score for breastfeeding support (β=2.166, p=0.028),
but negatively associated with support strategies score (β= -2.203, p=0.026).
Conclusion: Overall, paternal support and positive attitude were associated with
breastfeeding duration. It is important to increase public awareness on the
important roles of fathers during the breastfeeding process such as emphasizing
the husband’s role in supporting their wives to breastfeed, as well as the
importance of paternal role in caring the baby, especially among new couples.
