Title: Digipõlvkonnast sotsiaalmeedia põlvkonnaks. Põlvkondlikku enesemääratlust kujundavad trendid Eesti noorte internetikasutuses / From the digital generation to the social media generation: the main internet usage trends among Estonian young people leading t
Authors: Andra Siibak
ID: openalex.W3112596535
URL: https://doi.org/10.7592/methis.v21i26.16908

Meediakasutust puudutavad isiksuseomadused on kujunenud olulisteks põlvkondliku
enesemääratluse ja identiteedi osisteks. Artiklis tutvustatakse
meediapõlvkondade kultuurilisest käsitlusest lähtuvat lähenemist, mis näeb
tänapäeva lapsi ja noori sotsiaalmeedia põlvkonnana. Mitmete empiiriliste
uuringute tulemustele tuginevalt antakse artiklis ülevaade peamistest Eesti
noortele omastest internetikasutuse harjumustest ja internetitegevustest.
Millisena tajuvad sotsiaalmeedia põlvkonna esindajad sotsiaalmeedia rolli enda
igapäevaelus, näitavad viieks päevaks sotsiaalmeedia kasutamisest loobunud
noorte kogemuspäevikute sissekanded.&#x0D; &#x0D; Scholars argue that the sense
of belonging to a generation has proven to be one of the most important
prerequisites for the formation of media habits and for the ways people consume
various media. Especially the experience with media and technologies during the
formative years, which helps to shape long-term media habits, is noted to be
relevant in defining generations and their media consumption cultures. Younger
generations, in particular, tend to build their generational identity around the
devices that they use, perceiving that the specificity of the self-definition of
their generation is anchored in the use of such technology. For example, a
variety of labels – “digital generation”, “Net generation”, “digital natives”,
etc. have been coined to signify the media preferences and supposed common media
habits of present-day young people.&#x0D; Relying on various recent quantitative
(e.g. EU Kids Online survey) and qualitative studies, the present article aims
to give an overview of the main trends surrounding Estonian children’s (9–17
year olds) internet use (e.g. access to the internet, time spent online, online
activities, using the internet for schoolwork, digital skills). Furthermore,
relying upon the findings of a qualitative study where young adults (n = 42,
18–23 year olds), who were asked to refrain from using any social media
platforms for five consecutive days, reflect in their detox diaries upon the
role social media plays in their daily lives.&#x0D; The findings of EU Kids
Online survey (n = 1020) from 2018 indicate that the internet has become an
integral part of the daily lives of Estonian young people. The findings
illustrate that 97 % of Estonian children (9–17 year olds) access internet
through at least one device (most commonly a mobile or a smart phone) on a daily
basis and tend to spend a significant amount of their waking hours on the
internet. During the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, children’s screen time has
increased even more. Furthermore, the present-day pandemic has also revealed a
digital stratification trend, which was not as strikingly evident in 2018 – in
many households (34 %) children need to share devices for accessing remote
learning platforms, as smart phones are not as user friendly.&#x0D; Estonian
young people claim to be versatile internet users, although entertainment and
communication-related activities tend to prevail. Although children’s self-
assessment of their digital skills is very good, children’s engagement in
creative and participatory online activities, which also require more digital
skills, is still rather uncommon. Findings of qualitative studies indicate that
young people’s modest digital participation can be explained by their lack of
motivation on the one hand, and the lack of polite and reasoned communication
culture, on the other hand.&#x0D; Due to the variety of affordances social media
platforms provide, many children and young adults in Estonia have become
habitual users of social media. The analysis of social media detox diaries
revealed that for many young people social media is invisibly present in most of
their daily activities (e.g. while eating, waiting to catch a bus, attending a
lecture, taking a bath, etc.). Furthermore, the communicative interactions the
young people engaged in, as well as the maintenance of both personal and
professional relationships, had become increasingly mediated through various
social media platforms. Thus, many young persons described their experience of
feeling anxiety and FOMO (fear of missing out) during the social media detox.
Thus, they experienced a need to find alternatives to their previously
established media diets. In fact, in some of the participants, social media
detox also triggered technostalgia for pre-digital forms of communication and
“older” ways of communicating (e. g. face-to-face contacts, speaking on the
phone).
