Title: Biomedical career enrichment programs: Exploring women and minority participants’ motivators and outcomes
Authors: Rishita Bhatt, Bernadette West, Sunita Chaudhary
ID: openalex.W3005794567
URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0228934

Limited empirical data exists on why women and minority students enter
Biomedical Career Enrichment Programs (BCEPs) and how program variables-such as
duration of research-influence their intention to pursue research careers. This
exploratory study reports motivators for participation in BCEPs among women and
racial/ethnic minority students-historically underrepresented groups-and the
influence of program and personal variables on their research-career intent and
self-efficacy beliefs. We studied the program variables of research experience,
research duration, and mentor influence; and the personal variables of race,
gender, family, and peers. Using the conceptual framework of planned behavior
theory and social cognitive career theory, we interviewed students from
underrepresented groups participating in BCEPs that offered research experience
for short duration (Group A), long duration (Group B), and no research
experience (Group C). We utilized Atlas Ti, a qualitative methodological
software tool, to analyze the interview responses. Students choosing a BCEP with
research experience cited "opportunity to gain experience" and "interest or
curiosity in research" as motivators. Duration of research experience had a
positive relationship with enhancement in research skills and self-efficacy
beliefs, but did not change the initial research-career intent of these BCEP
participants. The study revealed an interesting and unexpected theme of
"perceived deterrents" to a career in research that included stress of
competition (e.g. grants), the instability of projects, and the isolation of
scientific research. Importantly, the study findings indicate the need to reform
program design and science policies that challenge the current biomedical
workforce and dissuade interested students from underrepresented groups from
entering the field.
