Title: Lev Venediktov's Choir Theater and His Traditions, Creative Method, Synthesis
Authors: Oksana Letychevska
ID: openalex.W3160864096
URL: https://doi.org/10.31318/2414-052x.2-3(47-48).2020.213399

The aspects of the creative activity of the outstanding opera choirmaster Lev
Venediktov, an epoch-making figure in the Ukrainian choral art of the second
half of the 20th — the beginning of the 21st century, are considered. The
influence of family succession, the achievements of professional communication
with outstanding contemporary musicians, the traditions of opera and choral
performance at the National Academic Opera and Ballet Theater of Ukraine on the
formation of Master’s creative personality are highlighted. The importance of
his creative and musical-pedagogical activity in the formation of a high
artistic standard of choral performance, enlightenment promotion of the best
performing traditions, professional education of several generations of
Ukrainian choral conductors are emphasized. The importance of the choirmaster's
work in creating original highly artistic performing interpretations of operas
is noted. The features of the individual performance style of L. Venediktov's
choir, which was an important component of the opera, highlighting the synthesis
of music, words and dramatic action imagery, are highlighted. Such moments of
the choirmaster's work as the complete set of the choral composition, work on
the acoustic characteristics of the sound, ensemble, synthesis of musical-verbal
intonation, dynamics, timbre, strokes are analyzed. An attempt is made to
generalize the features of individual performance style and methods of work of
the choirmaster, highlighting the mechanisms of formation of opera synthesis in
them. L. Venediktov's cooperation with the conductor and director of the play,
aimed at revealing the interpretive possibilities of choral performance as a
component of opera synthesis, is observed. It is noted that due to the
performing qualities, the choir under the direction of L. Venediktov was
recognized as a unique phenomenon, engraved as a characteristic feature of
Ukrainian opera, in particular, in the projection of Ukrainian-European
intercultural dialogue. It is confirmed that the creative method of the
choirmaster is unique in combining the best traditions of the national choral
school with the principles of opera performance, demonstrates the unity of
general-objective and subjective-individual in creating performing
interpretations of operas
