Title: Open science, communal culture, and women’s participation in the movement to improve science
Authors: Mary C Murphy, Amanda F. Mejia, Jorge Mejia, Xiaoran Yan, Sapna Cheryan
ID: openalex.W3087704451
URL: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1921320117

Science is undergoing rapid change with the movement to improve science focused
largely on reproducibility/replicability and open science practices. This moment
of change-in which science turns inward to examine its methods and practices-
provides an opportunity to address its historic lack of diversity and
noninclusive culture. Through network modeling and semantic analysis, we provide
an initial exploration of the structure, cultural frames, and women's
participation in the open science and reproducibility literatures (<i>n</i> =
2,926 articles and conference proceedings). Network analyses suggest that the
open science and reproducibility literatures are emerging relatively
independently of each other, sharing few common papers or authors. We next
examine whether the literatures differentially incorporate collaborative,
prosocial ideals that are known to engage members of underrepresented groups
more than independent, winner-takes-all approaches. We find that open science
has a more connected, collaborative structure than does reproducibility.
Semantic analyses of paper abstracts reveal that these literatures have adopted
different cultural frames: open science includes more explicitly communal and
prosocial language than does reproducibility. Finally, consistent with
literature suggesting the diversity benefits of communal and prosocial purposes,
we find that women publish more frequently in high-status author positions
(first or last) within open science (vs. reproducibility). Furthermore, this
finding is further patterned by team size and time. Women are more represented
in larger teams within reproducibility, and women's participation is increasing
in open science over time and decreasing in reproducibility. We conclude with
actionable suggestions for cultivating a more prosocial and diverse culture of
science.
