Title: A swing and a child: how scientific phenomena can come to matter for preschool children’s emergent science identities
Authors: Anna Günther-Hanssen
ID: openalex.W3080514454
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11422-020-09980-w

Abstract The focus of this study is the co-actings of a 5-year-old girl, a
swing, and physical phenomena. The study explores how the swing and physical
phenomena worked as co-creators of the girl’s scientific explorations as well as
her bodily capacities and identity construction. Empirically, the study makes
use of a video sequence generated during a field study in a Swedish preschool
with 5-year-old children. The field study focused on the children’s play and
explorations together with the preschool environment, during activities not
specifically guided by teachers. To conceptualize children’s emergent scientific
learning as mutual with their identity construction and as being co-created
together with nonhuman agents, the study combines perspectives from new
materialism, emergent science, physics, and gender theory. As a theoretical and
methodological foundation, a new materialist perspective drawing on Karen
Barad’s (Meeting the universe halfway. Quantum physics of the entanglement of
matter and meaning, Duke University Press, London, 2007) theory of agential
realism and diffractive methodology were used, as well as Elizabeth de Freitas
and Anna Palmer’s (Cult Stud Sci Educ 11(4):1201–1222, 2016.
10.1007/s11422-014-9652-6 ) notion concerning how scientific concepts can work
as creative playmates in children’s explorations. The findings show how the
girl, together with the swing, could experience and explore various physical
phenomena as well as, extend her bodily capacities and become brave and strong.
As such, new materialism shows how scientific phenomena can create affordances
for an individual’s becomings as scientific as well as how “becoming scientific”
can be understood. At the same time, the findings also indicate the importance
of teachers not assuming that scientific phenomena are automatically part of
children’s play or can be experienced by all children all the time. The explored
situation was rare. On most occasions, the girl did not get the same kind of
experiences with the swing because of gender norms. I argue that norms and
discourses connected to science and gender are not things that “come with” older
children or are only introduced by adults. These are instead already in the
making and re-making within children’s co-actings with the material-discursive
environment in preschool. It is therefore important that teachers engage in
children’s embodied play with scientific phenomena, with the aim to empower the
children, their bodies, capacities and (science) identities.
