Title: Opportunities for education in a changing climate: Themes from key informant interviews
Authors: Rachel Bolstad
ID: openalex.W3094099702
URL: https://doi.org/10.18296/rep.0006

How can education in Aotearoa New Zealand respond to climate change? This
report, part of our wider education and climate change project, outlines
findings from 17 in-depth interviews with individuals with a range of viewpoints
about climate change and the role of education. Five priority perspectives are
covered: youth (aged 16–25); educators; Māori; Pacific New Zealanders; and
people with an academic, education system, or policy perspective. Key findings
are: Education offers an important opportunity for diverse children and young
people to engage in positive, solutions-focused climate learning and action.
Interviewees shared local examples of effective climate change educational
practice, but said it was often down to individual teachers, students, and
schools choosing to make it a focus. Most interviewees said that climate change
needs to be a more visible priority across the education system. The
perspectives and examples shared suggest there is scope for growth and
development in the way that schools and the wider education system in Aotearoa
New Zealand respond to climate change. Interviewees’ experiences suggest that
localised innovation and change is possible, particularly when young people and
communities are informed about the causes and consequences of climate change,
and are engaged with what they can do to make a difference. However, effective
responses to climate change are affected by wider systems, societal and
political structures, norms, and mindsets. Interviewee recommendations for
schools, kura, and other learning settings include: Supporting diverse children
and young people to develop their ideas and visions for a sustainable future,
and to identify actions they can take to realise that future. Involving children
and young people in collective and local approaches, and community-wide
responses to climate change. Scaffolding learners to ensure that they were
building key knowledge, as well as developing ethical thinking, systems
thinking, and critical thinking. Focusing on new career opportunities and
pathways in an economic transition to a low-carbon, changed climate future.
Getting children and young people engaged and excited about what they can do,
rather than disengaged, depressed, or feeling like they have no control of their
future.
