Title: Using Creative Writing to Explore Identity Formation: A Participatory Study with Adolescents in Post-Conflict Colombia (PhD Thesis) - Appendices
Authors: Camila Fuentes Díaz
ID: openalex.W3138648731
URL: https://doi.org/10.17870/bathspa.c.5209940.v1

This Collection contains files and documents uploaded as appendices for the
thesis, <i>Using Creative Writing to Explore Identity Formation: A Participatory
Study with Adolescents in Post-Conflict Colombia</i>. The thesis is linked in
the reference field below. Please see the following text for the thesis
abstract. <br>Abstract: This thesis explores Colombian adolescents’ identity
formation through a creative writing programme within a school context. This
research investigates how this programme aids the exploration of adolescents’
identity formation focusing on the youth participants’ perceptions, as well as
on the identity formation aspects they portray in their creative writing.
Underpinned by social constructionism, this study stands on the ontological
premise that social interaction precedes the construction of knowledge, and
places language at the centre of identity formation. In particular, this study
uses Dan McAdams’ narrative identity theory and Kenneth Gergen’s concept of
relational being as key conceptual schema. The fieldwork took place in a public
school in Colombia and lasted for 19 weeks. Fifteen ninth grade participants
(14-16 year-old students; or equivalent of UK Year 11) volunteered, eleven women
and four men. The research design was built upon a participatory mixed
qualitative research design, which joined methods from arts-based research,
educational practice and the social sciences. The six creative writing workshops
were designed within a project-based learning structure and were complemented by
more established qualitative research techniques like interviews and focus
groups. The book, together with the interviews and the participants’ reflective
narratives on the process, were chosen as the main data for analysis. The
findings highlight the fact that creative writing programmes aid identity
formation by providing opportunities for authentic self-expression. The role of
the researcher as a facilitator is highlighted. The adolescents’ creative
writing reveals identity is constructed around trust and the constant
negotiation of inner emotions with outer expressions of the self. The findings
evidence implications for research design, data use and analysis and educational
practice. Most importantly, this research argues for shifting the focus to
authentic expressions of identity (versus notions of positive identity), by
valuing agency in mid-adolescents.<br>Text for this thesis is held on
ResearchSPAce, the institutional outputs repository at Bath Spa University.
