Title: Striding towards the pinnacles of professional growth, scientific epitome, and leadership: India's women anaesthesiologists
Authors: MadhuriS Kurdi, ManishaD Katikar, Vanita Ahuja, Ridhima Sharma
ID: openalex.W3081928272
URL: https://doi.org/10.4103/ija.ija_1116_20

Women anaesthesiologists in the past have many a times had to deal with negative
behaviours of surgeons. A case of a male surgeon telling a lady
anaesthesiologist “You should not be working. You should be at home looking
after the children” has been reported in a survey. Another instance wherein a
female anaesthesiologist was always spoken to by the surgeon via a third person
whenever they were working together has also been reported.[1] Well, do such
negative attitudes towards women anaesthesia practitioners exist in the
operation theatres even today? It is said that gender inequality at work is
likely to be still rampant in some parts of the world. Though the professional
opportunities are at par for female anaesthesiologists in our nation, they still
face challenges. It is not very easy for people to pursue speciality careers in
medicine and that too in the field of anaesthesia. Administering anaesthesia is
a balancing act. For a woman anaesthesiologist who balances multiple roles on
the professional and personal fronts, it is a much tougher job. Women very often
have to interrupt their careers to accommodate their spouse's careers and to
manage issues like pregnancy and child upbringing. Many women do not get their
family's support and hence have given up the golden opportunities in their
careers. Conflicts between the career and family, lifestyle issues, and
conflicts at the workplace may make the woman anaesthesia practitioner
distressed in her everyday life. Providing a calming work and home environment
will definitely make her feel empowered and her perfection at work will further
improve. A doting mother, loving wife, and a perfect daughter-in-law in the
house, this same lady undergoes a magnificent transformation when she wears her
operation theatre scrubs. She is now ambitious, strong, fearless, and commanding
and ready to put to use her fine clinical skills and knowledge. Her God-gifted
compassionate nature creates an emotional bond and a soothing attachment with
the patient. This legacy of the important role of women in anaesthesia has been
carried forward through the years. India's Rupa Bai Furdoonji became the world's
first woman physician anaesthesiologist. She worked to administer chloroform in
Hyderabad during the years 1889–1917. She worked under Edward Lawrie, the
Principal of Hyderabad Medical School. Edward Lawrie had lauded her for her
skills in the book”A Report on Hyderabad Chloroform Commissions” published in
1891. He had recommended her for higher studies to Edinburgh from where there
was no looking back for her.[2] Thus, good work does not see gender and does get
its due recognition with time. Today, women in anaesthesia in our nation, make
up a significant proportion of the anaesthesia fraternity as successful clinical
practitioners, researchers, and teachers. Gender inequality does not truly
exist. What exists is the choice of anaesthesiologists on the basis of their
clinical competence, punctuality, and rapport with the surgeon. A change in the
patriarchal mindset of the society will help the woman anaesthesiologist balance
well between her family and professional work. This will improve her
professional efficiency. Nevertheless, the changes in society are now taking
place quite fast and women are getting the full support of their families for
their education and jobs. Another important aspect arises in the field of
academics. There are several international publications which portray the under-
representation of women in anaesthesiology literature and in the top tiers of
academic practice. A scoping review by Bosco et al. concluded that women are
under-represented in academic positions, in journal authorship, as editorial
board members, and as award recipients.[3] A recent study concluded that
although the incidence of female authorship has significantly increased from
2010 to 2018, women represent less than a third of first authors and less than a
fifth of last authors of original research papers published in three
international anaesthesiology journals with high impact factors—the British
Journal of Anaesthesia, Anesthesiology, and Anaesthesia.[4] A study, on original
research articles, published in two high-impact anaesthesiology journals,
Anesthesiology and Anesthesia and Analgesia over the past 15 years demonstrated
that women made up a higher percentage of first authors on manuscripts with
female senior authors. More non-experimental studies had female senior authors
than experimental studies; also, there were more female first authors in the
sub-specialities of neuro-anaesthesia, obstetric anaesthesia, pain management,
and paediatric anaesthesia.[5] Demailly et al. found that the visibility of
women remains lower than that of men, particularly on social networks dedicated
to science research (e.g., Research Gate).[6] A systematic review of 52 studies
published between 1985 and 2015 found consistent evidence for ideas like women
are more interested in teaching than in research, participation in research can
encourage women into academic medicine, and that women lack adequate mentors and
role models.[7] Interestingly, these facts mentioned in international literature
do not match with the picture in our nation. A glimpse into the immediate past
issues of the Indian Journal of Anaesthesia (IJA) revealed quite a good number
of articles with women as first authors in almost every issue. The February,
April, June, and July 2020 issues have almost 50% of articles with women as
first authors. There are several “all girls” original articles and case reports
in the past issues of the IJA.[89] This current issue of the IJA is an “all
women” issue and is decked with almost 100% of all articles, including original
articles by female anaesthesiologists as first or corresponding
authors.[1011121314151617] We firmly believe that this women's issue of our
journal will definitely inspire our country's women anaesthesiologists and serve
as an impetus to research and leadership. An analysis of the February 2020
supplement of the IJA with abstracts of award papers selected at the Indian
Society of Anaesthesiologists national conference (ISACON) 2019 revealed a
sizeable number of female award paper nominees[18]– Kop's award [Cardiac
anaesthesia (6/10), Obstetric anaesthesia (8/10), Paediatric anaesthesia (7/10),
Neuroanaesthesia (7/10), Clinical Pharmacology (5/10), Pain (7/10), Trauma and
Critical Care (4/10), Practitioners forum (6/9)], TN Jha award and KP Chansoriya
Travel Grant (9/15), Jaipur award (Day Care Anesthesia 6/10, Pain 5/10, Airway
6/10), Ludhiana E-Poster award 4/7]. These statistics speak very well for
themselves. This sparkling representation of Indian women on the podium of award
paper presentations, as authors of good quality original articles in scientific
journals, their excellent performances as peer reviewers and editorial team
members and their promising participation as popular faculty at conferences
depicts their academic progress. They are certainly getting stronger by the day.
Attaining senior medical faculty posts in teaching in Western countries depends
a lot on the quality and the quantity of research work done by the faculty. This
was not the case in India in the yester years. It is only of late that the
Medical Council of India made research publications in indexed journals
mandatory for academic promotions in medical colleges to improve the research
output of our country. We have had and are still having many senior women
faculty members in anaesthesiology departments of medical colleges in India. A
majority of them have been teaching, inspiring, influencing, supporting, caring,
and nurturing their students. Their vast clinical experience, educational
qualities, and motherly attitude have created a great impact on several
students. This has played an important role in shaping the future generation of
anaesthesiologists. Some of the teachers have refused job transfers to other
cities or places just to take care of their families, and in the bargain have
sacrificed their academic promotions to higher faculty positions. Many of them
have managed tough administrative positions in medical colleges, army, and
corporate hospitals as departmental heads, hospital superintendents,
commandants, and deans; in fact, several women anaesthesiologists in our country
are actively pursuing anaesthesia practice and teaching even beyond 60 years of
age. These successful teachers and practitioners serve as mentors or
“inspirational role models” for the younger generation anaesthesiologists.
Nowadays, there has been a rising trend in women choosing anaesthesiology as
their speciality for postgraduate training (both MD and DNB). The under-
representation of women in professional committees and their lagging behind in
leadership positions in anaesthesiology is another issue in world
literature.[19] What could be the possible reasons for the under-representation
of women in leadership roles? The reason for women not interested in pursuing a
leadership position has been usually attributed to the family commitments and
household responsibilities.[20] Women certainly have all the qualities of
leadership and can lead even during difficult times. Who can forget Virginia
Apgar and her achievements? She received the title of “America's best known
anaesthesiologist: male or female.” She directed the division of Anaesthesia at
Columbia University in 1940. At a time when American Society of
Anesthesiologists (ASA) finances were disorganised, she held the treasurer's
role and successfully placed the ASA and its journal Anesthesiology on a sound
financial footing.[21] The first President of the South Asian Confederation of
Anaesthesiologists was a lady anaesthesiologist—our very own Dr. VM Divekar. The
Indian Society of Anaesthesiologists (ISA), however, has had only six lady
anaesthesiologists as national Presidents since its inception in 1947 and one
lady Editor-in-Chief of the IJA since 1953; few other lady anaesthesiologists
have been Governing Council members, state presidents and secretaries and a few
have been leading sub-speciality and superspeciality organisations. It is likely
that due to the tough balancing of professional and personal issues, our lady
anaesthesiologists may develop disinterest in academics and organisational
activities.ISA mentorship programs could probably help them in this regard. The
modern Indian woman has clarity, confidence, knowledge, is technology savvy,
knows how to handle erratic schedules, and strike a fine professional life–home
balance; nonetheless, our women anaesthesiologists are showing their efficiency
today as frontline corona warriors and home warriors managing disturbed
professional and domestic schedules. Michelle Obama once said,”There is no limit
to what we women can accomplish.” We, therefore appeal to our women
anaesthesiologists to nurture academic and leadership dreams and to combine
clinical practice and family care with good quality high-impact research. The
zeal for research has to come from within them and the time needed for it has to
be shared or created. They should think that “Research” is their baby which
needs to be nurtured and grown. They need to arise, awake, and stretch their
wings to realise their true potential in leadership. We believe that with
perseverance, hard work, and passion, they can definitely achieve. It is beyond
doubt that the” Mom! I won!” and the joy of a hug and a peck on our cheeks from
our children are blissful, but equally joyful are our other achievements. Does
the joy of seeing our articles published in reputed journals, the experience of
being office bearers of organisations, the involvement in guideline and reviewer
panels, the applause received on well-delivered lectures, the satisfaction of
doing a complicated case, the happiness of a well conducted seminar for our
postgraduate students not match the joy of motherhood? Well, it does, and we
need to work hard and make up our minds to experience it. All of us should
recollect one of the verses from the Manu Smriti which says, “Yatra Naryastu
Pujyante, Ramante Tatra Devataa” meaning “Gods reside in places where a woman is
worshipped.” We conclude by saying that India's women anaesthesiologists are
moving ahead. In fact, they should and they can, but only if they want to!!
