Title: Sociocultural and economic determinants of stunting and thinness among adolescent boys and girls in Nepal
Authors: Charlotte J. W. van Tuijl, Dónya S. Madjdian, Hilde Bras, Binaya Chalise
ID: openalex.W3041993293
URL: https://doi.org/10.1017/s0021932020000358

Despite the increasing interest in the determinants of adolescent undernutrition
in low- and middle-income countries, a comprehensive multi-level overview at the
country level is missing. Using the nationally representative 2014 Nepal
Adolescent Nutrition Survey, this study aimed to provide a comprehensive
overview of the sociocultural and economic determinants of stunting and thinness
of adolescent boys and girls in Nepal. Multivariate logistic regression models
were used to estimate the associations between multiple individual, household
and community determinants and stunting and thinness among 3773 adolescents aged
10-19 years (1888 boys and 1885 girls). The prevalence rates of stunting and
thinness indicated suboptimal nutritional status and an inadequate growth
environment in Nepali adolescents. The results highlighted an association of
paternal occupation and education, household income, number of earning household
members, geographical place of residence, caste/ethnicity and nutritional
knowledge with stunting, with higher odds for males and older adolescents.
Paternal occupation, education, household income, geographical region,
caste/ethnicity and nutrition knowledge were associated with thinness, with
higher odds for males and younger adolescents. The findings underscore the
importance of involving adolescents, their parents and their communities in
interventions. Such interventions should not only be aimed at improving
adolescent nutrition but also at optimizing adolescents' growth environment for
better health and development. Future research should focus on context-specific
causal pathways and mechanisms through which sociocultural and economic
determinants influence nutritional outcomes within broader societal, cultural
and political settings. A longitudinal approach, including a range of dietary
and nutrition indicators would allow understanding how and when the relative
importance of these factors change during adolescence.
