Title: Cardiorespiratory, hematological and body composition changes in maturing girls and boys with different training backgrounds
Authors: Hege Wilson Landgraff
ID: openalex.W3116748688
URL: https://hdl.handle.net/11250/2720452

This thesis is based on one longitudinal study, monitoring a group of children
from age 12 to age 15. The main objective was to establish the association
between growth, maximal oxygen uptake (VO2max), hematological variables and
cardiac dimensions in girls and boys during puberty. We also aimed at
investigating the effects of inclusion of high volumes of endurance training in
active children. Further, in a cross-sectional study, bioelectrical impedance
analysis (BIA; InBody 720) was validated against dual-energy X-ray
absorptiometry (DXA) for assessing body composition.\n\nSeventy-eight children
volunteered to participate in the study, and came for repeated measurements at
age 12, 13 and 15. They were assigned to an endurance training group (End group;
40 girls and boys) and a non-endurance training group (non-End group; 38 girls
and boys) based on the types of sport and volume of endurance training they were
undertaking. Total weekly volume of training at age 14-15 was 10.7 (2.8) hours
and 8.3 (3.7) hours in the End and non-End group, respectively, while weekly
volume of endurance specific training was 7.3 (1.8) hours and 1.5 (1.1) hours,
respectively. \n\nVO2max was determined by an incremental running test to
exhaustion on a treadmill and haemoglobin mass (Hbmass) and blood volume (BV)
were assessed using the optimized carbon monoxide rebreathing method. Cardiac
dimension measurements were performed using two- and three-dimensional
echocardiography. Anthropometric measurements included body mass (BM), height
and sitting height, and body composition which was assessed using InBody 720.
\n\nThere were significant sex differences in the rate of development of VO2max
and intravascular volumes in absolute values and relative to BM from age 12 to
15, with on average a larger increase in boys. The timing of the appearance of
pronounced sex differences was aligned with significant differences in the
development of body-composition, and when related to fat free mass (FFM), the
age effect of sex from age 12 to 15 disappeared. \n\nThere was on average no
interaction between age and training group in the development of all measures of
VO2max, and intravascular volumes in absolute values from age 12-15. For Hbmass
and red cell volume (RCV) relative to FFM, there was no difference between boys,
however for girls, there was a difference in the age effect between the training
groups, with no increase in the End girls over the three years. \n\nThere were
no differences between the training groups in the alteration of cardiac
dimensions relative to FFM; however, the End group experienced a smaller
increase in left ventricular posterior wall thickness in diastole (LV PWd) than
the non-End group. This led to a decrease in relative wall thickness (RWT) in
the End group indicating eccentric remodeling, while RWT stayed unchanged in the
non-End group compared to what was seen in both groups at baseline. \n\nThere
were very strong to almost perfect correlations between absolute values for
VO2maks, intravascular volumes, and cardiac dimensions and FFM at both 12 and 15
years of age. Also, no change in FFM-relative values of VO2max and no or minor
changes in vascular volumes relative to FFM during the study period, indicate
that these variables develop in parallel with FFM. \n\nIn boys, time to
exhaustion (TTE) increased in both groups but increased significantly more in
the End boys than in the non-End boys, while the development of VO2max did not
differ between the training groups. This suggests that endurance training may
have had a significant effect on determinant factors other than VO2max. This
pronounced difference between the training groups was not seen in girls.
\n\nValidating InBody 720 against DXA, showed that InBody 720 underestimated FM
and overestimated FFM. However, the correlation between the devices was almost
perfect for both FM and FFM. Taken together, this indicate that InBody 720 is a
valid method in estimating changes in FFM during growth. \n\nIn conclusion, the
present longitudinal study suggests that the development of VO2max and
intravascular volumes was dependent on sex but not on volume of endurance
training. \nUsing multiple linear regression analysis for developing a model for
predicting changes in VO2max from measurements of changes in anthropometrics,
heart dimensions and intravascular volumes, indicated that a model which
included changes in FFM and Hbmass was best suited. This model was able to
account for 74% of the variance in the change in VO2max.
