Title: Photovoice and Youth on Violence and Related Topics: A Systematic Review
Authors: Yingwei Yang, Andrew C. Lim, Renée E. Wallace, Stephanie Marhefka-Day, Karen D. Liller
ID: openalex.W3045489942
URL: https://digitalcommons.unf.edu/fphr/vol17/iss1/6

Background and Purpose: Photovoice is a qualitative method that empowers youth
to identify community issues and assets through photo-taking and photo
discussions. The purpose of this systematic review was to explore the
characteristics of studies using photovoice in violence and related topics among
youth, and the rationale, strengths and limitations of the photovoice
methodology when applied to youth. Methods: Inclusion criteria, search strategy,
and data extraction and analysis plan were specified in advance and documented
in a protocol (Registration: PROSPERO-CRD42018087290). The search strategy
included three search concepts: photovoice, youth, and violence-related topics.
Two rounds of formal searches were executed across the following electronic
databases: PubMed, CINAHL, PsycINFO, Embase, and Web of Science, using the
predefined search terms and strings in the registered protocol. Searching
records were screened and selected based on inclusion criteria. Included studies
were extracted to a predefined spreadsheet and synthesized narratively. Results:
A total of 23 studies were included in this systematic review, of which, 17
studies described the cameras used for photo taking, 15 studies used the SHOWeD
framework for photo discussions, 12 studies provided an in-depth description of
the thematic analysis process, and 11 studies addressed dissemination activities
and social actions. Most studies mentioned the rationale of using photovoice,
stating that it empowered youth to express their concerns on community issues
while inspiring their critical thinking for social action in youth participatory
action research (YPAR) and community-based participatory research (CBPR). The
strengths and limitations of the photovoice methodology were also discussed from
the perspective of youth participants, researchers, and communities. Discussion:
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first systematic review that provides
thorough summaries on the characteristics of photovoice studies on violence and
related topics among youth, as well as the strengths and limitations of using
the photovoice methodology in these studies.
