Title: Animal Magic, Secret Spells, and Green Power: More-Than-Human Assemblages of Children's Storytelling
Authors: Angela Molloy Murphy
ID: openalex.W3036838121
URL: https://doi.org/10.15760/etd.7318

Early childhood settings have become contested spaces, or sites of struggle,
between economic and sociocultural interests disputing their purpose. Recent
years have shown increased pressure on children in early education settings to
demonstrate predetermined learning outcomes, which (a) limits the scope of what
is possible in the classroom, (b) narrows the range of what learning is
considered valid, and (c) privileges the experience and values of the dominant
culture, thereby determining who and what matters in early childhood settings.
Thus, in the current education climate where conventional knowledges are
routinely privileged, unconventional knowledges and small stories from
children's lives are frequently disregarded or otherwise pushed to the margins
of daily classroom life. The purpose of this post qualitative study was to
position children's storytelling as a disruptive force to western, positivist,
and humanist knowledges in early childhood education and research. In this
study, the author uses critical posthumanist/new materialist theories as a
research approach to consider children's storytelling in an early childhood
setting. Adopting the role of observant participator, the author worked
alongside ten 2.5-5-year-old (co)-participants using observations, photography,
and classroom discussions to investigate the relational and emergent dimensions
of children's storytelling. Pedagogical narration was used as an approach to
data analysis, drawing lines between interconnected episodes and pointing to the
more-than-human relational encounters that were present in children's everyday
storytelling practices. In this study, storytelling is found to be a generative
process, produced within a complex assemblage of human and non-human actors. The
second finding that emerged is that an expanded concept of narrativity is
required to fully attune and attend to the multiplicitous storytelling occurring
within early childhood settings. Lastly, in this study, children's stories were
shown to have the potential to act as thought experiments for envisioning
possible worlds. This study broke from conventional education research by
considering not what worlds are being reflected in children's storytelling, but
rather what worlds are being produced. This is an important distinction at this
particular moment in history, when we must consider what knowledges are
legitimized and what are outcast by our systems of education, and what worlds
are produced and reproduced in the process.
