Title: ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS IN THE DANCE CLASSROOM: BUILDING BRIDGES TO RIGOROUS LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
Authors: Breegan Kearney
ID: openalex.W3133823836
URL: https://digscholarship.unco.edu/theses/184

The purpose of this study was to investigate several aspects of instructing
English Learners (ELs) in the dance classroom. The researcher created three
essential questions to guide her research: Q1 What specific strategies are
currently being utilized by dance teachers to support English Learners in
accessing dance-specific language? Q2 What are the opportunities for and
barriers to incorporating these strategies? Q3 Does this teaching process have
any effect on student engagement in dance class? Thirty dance educators
discussed their experiences instructing English Learners in dance content in the
form of a digital survey, and rated common strategies for ELs based on their
frequency of use. Some limitations of this study were that EL student voices
were not incorporated into the research, the sample size of participants who
were teachers was relatively small and only reflected their respective
experiences, and was therefore not completely comprehensive. Additionally, the
research tool was created by the researcher and had not been verified for
validity by other research. Analysis of the data showed that multi-modal
educational approaches and peer collaboration were used frequently by the
participants. The findings of this research suggested that opportunities for
more linguistic rigor in dance class exist, especially in activities which
relate to the Reflecting and Connecting aspects of the National Core Arts
Standards for Dance. A major barrier to effective EL instruction reported by
participants in this study was a lack of support and training which was either
non-existent or generally irrelevant to the dance classroom. Finally, this study
showed that the participants felt that students were engaged in dance class, and
that the dance classroom was a place where they felt respected and safe.
