Title: The evidence base for art therapy with parent and infant dyads: an integrative literature review
Authors: Victoria Armstrong, J. Ross
ID: openalex.W3005015721
URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/17454832.2020.1724165

We aimed to evaluate the existing evidence base for the efficacy of art therapy
with parent-infant dyads. We undertook an integrative review, following the
PRISMA protocol, systematically searching 4 electronic databases, and grey
literature, for papers describing art therapy with parents and infants together.
14 papers were identified for inclusion. These were evaluated for quality, data
was synthesised for evidence of change, and we undertook a narrative synthesis
of intervention model and thematic analysis drawing together mechanisms of
change within the art therapy process. Papers described a group approach to art
therapy and contained a mixture of methodological approaches. Themes highlighted
the beneficial aspects of the art therapy process that might be common to group
psychotherapy approaches and those which were unique to art making, such as the
qualities of the materials, the making process and the final art works. The
themes identified provide a basis for further research into mechanisms of change
within parent-infant art therapy. Those papers which presented quantitative
evidence demonstrated promising evidence for the value of art therapy but we
identify the need for larger participant numbers and control measures, for this
evidence to confidently state the impact of art therapy.Plain language
summaryThis paper is based on a review of the current evidence for an art
therapy approach to working with parents and their infants together. We searched
data bases and other online sources and put out calls for unpublished work to
art therapy organisations. We looked for art therapy for parents together with
their 0–3s and this could be with the individual pairs or with groups. We
reviewed the papers we found and 14 were included in the final stage of this
review.We have compared their models for art therapy work and their results and
we have also looked for the common themes about why art therapy seems to be
helping in order to provide a solid basis for future research in this area. We
think there is promising early evidence that art therapy can help parents and
infants in a number of areas, such as building the parent-infant relationship
and improving parental well-being but this research highlights the need for
further, larger scale and controlled studies.
