Title: An exploration of the experience of trainee integrative psychotherapists  on therapeutic alliance in the light of their attachment style
Authors: Eleni Rizou, Vaitsa Giannouli
ID: openalex.W3117465087
URL: https://doi.org/10.4081/hpr.2020.9177

Therapeutic Relationship has been regarded as a profound element of the
psychotherapeutic procedure and crucial for the outcome of therapy. Research
evidence so far claims that both therapist's and client's personality can impact
the Therapeutic Relationship. Based on the well-researched Attachment Theory
there has been some research mostly focused on how clients' attachment patterns
can affect the Alliance. Limited research, though, on how therapists experience
the Relationship in relation with their Attachment Styles do exist. The current
study investigates trainee therapists' experience of the Therapeutic
Relationship in the light of their Attachment Style. A qualitative approach was
used for this research to investigate in depth the experience of five trainee
Integrative psychotherapists who were recruited to take part in semi-structured
interviews. Interviews were transcribed and <i>verbatim</i> was divided into
superordinate and subordinate themes and analyzed by Interpretative
Phenomenological Analysis method. Four master themes were identified. Findings
were then compared and discussed according to existing literature. All
participants referred to the relevance of Attachment Theory in psychotherapy.
They also agreed on the activation of their Attachment Styles during the
therapeutic process. The securely attached therapist confirms previous studies
on her capability to offer a secure base for her clients. On the other hand
therapists with insecure Attachment Styles appeared sensitive in their
collaboration mostly with insecure clients. Anxiously attached therapists proved
to experience difficulty in the initial stages of the Therapeutic Relationship
while the combination of avoidant therapist-avoidant client appeared to be the
most demanding one, regarding the concept of trust and relationship ruptures. We
suggest that the exploration of trainee therapists' Attachment Styles as well as
the study of the Attachment Theory should be added to all Counseling and
Psychotherapy curricula regardless the therapeutic orientation because of its
contribution to forming positive Therapeutic Relationships.
