Title: Barriers and Facilitators to Promoting Oral Health Literacy and Patient Communication among Dental Providers in California
Authors: Winston Tseng, Elizabeth Pleasants, Susan L. Ivey, Karen Sokal‐Gutierrez, Jayanth Kumar
ID: openalex.W3114151106
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18010216

Studies demonstrate that dental providers value effective provider-patient
communication but use few recommended communication techniques. This study
explored perspectives of California dental providers and oral health literacy
experts in the United States on use of communication techniques. We conducted a
qualitative key informant interview study with 50 participants between November
2019 and March 2020, including 44 dental providers (dentists, hygienists, and
assistants) in public or private practice in California and 6 oral health
literacy (OHL) experts. We undertook thematic analysis of interview transcripts
and descriptive statistics about interviewees from pre-surveys. Dental providers
reported frequently speaking slowly, and using simple language and
models/radiographs to communicate with patients, while infrequently using
interpretation/translation, illustrations, teach-back, or motivational
interviewing. Providers reported using only 6 of the 18 American Medical
Association's (AMA) recommended communication techniques and only 3 of the 7
AMA's basic communication techniques. A majority of providers indicated using
one of five oral health assessment and educational strategies. Key barriers to
effective communication included limited time, financial incentives promoting
treatment over prevention, lack of OHL training, limited plain-language patient
education materials, and patients with low OHL knowledge. Dental organizations
should prioritize supporting dental providers in effective patient communication
practices. Standardizing OHL continuing education, creating an evidence-based
OHL toolkit for dental teams, ensuring accessible interpretation/translation
services, and incentivizing dental providers to deliver education could improve
oral health literacy and outcomes.
