Title: Project Based Learning Pedagogical Design in STEAM Art Education
Authors: Ahmad Dasuki Mohd Hawari, Azlin Iryani Mohd Noor
ID: openalex.W3098239663
URL: https://doi.org/10.24191/ajue.v16i3.11072

This paper explores the potential of Project-Based Learning (PBL) approach in a
multidisciplinary art classroom involving STEAM (Science, Technology,
Engineering, Art, and Mathematics) education. The PBL approach involves a
dynamic classroom approach, which emphasises on long-term learning,
interdisciplinary and student-centred art activities. This implementation would
benefit the teaching strategies in art projects; helping students understand
lessons, improving communication and soft skills, as well as enhancing
leadership skills and creativity. However, there are some concerns related to
the PBL approach: i) difficulties in finding appropriate teaching strategies,
ii) choosing suitable projects, iii) selecting relevant measurement tools or
assessing rubrics, and iv) developing learning content to suit the objective and
the main purpose of the art curriculum. In identifying this approach’s
potential, a study was carried out involving two art teachers in their
respective classrooms. Data was collected through interviews, observations, and
document analysis of their teaching strategies, which included three main phases
of PBL implementation in creating art projects. The findings suggest that the
PBL pedagogical design has the ability to improve teaching strategies and with
potential to replace a traditional, teacher-led art classroom. The approach is
effective in guiding teachers to manoeuvre an authentic art lesson while
benefiting the students through emphasis on the artistic process of creating a
STEAM project, while focusing on culminating the necessary art content through
active collaboration, exploration of real-world challenges and curricular
activities’ problem-solving. However, a number of challenges were identified,
such as curriculum demand, learning content, teachers’ and students’ attitude,
and access to instruments. Hence, a number of suggestions and recommendations
are proposed to help resolve the challenges. The implications of the study on
arts curriculum, school systems and other higher institutions are also
discussed. Keywords: Project-Based Learning, Art Education, STEAM
