Title: Εξ αποστάσεως μουσειακή εκπαίδευση στην προσχολική αγωγή. Έρευνα Δράσης: Η δημιουργία ενός εικονικού μουσείου στο νηπιαγωγείο; Distance Museum Education in pre-school education. Action Research: The creation of a virtual museum in pre-school.
Authors: Όλγα Μουρατίδου, Evangelia Manousou
ID: openalex.W3120048860
URL: https://doi.org/10.12681/jode.23131

Η εξ αποστάσεως εκπαίδευση είναι η νέα τάση που επικρατεί τα τελευταία χρόνια
στο χώρο της παιδείας και υπόσχεται να καλύψει τις σύγχρονες ανάγκες των
μαθητών, σύμφωνα με τα ζητούμενα της νέας εποχής της Κοινωνίας της Γνώσης και
της Πληροφορίας. Τη σημασία της εξ αποστάσεως εκπαίδευσης, και κάποιες από τις
δυνατότητες της τις βιώσαμε ιδιαίτερα, την περίοδο της πανδημίας, όπου μια νέα
εφαρμογή της, που ονομάστηκε «επείγουσα» εξ αποστάσεως εκπαίδευση, αποτέλεσε τη
βασική επιλογή για τη συνέχιση της εκπαίδευσης, με όλες τις ιδιαιτερότητες και
τις δυσκολίες που αναδείχθηκαν. Ωστόσο για την εφαρμογή της στην προσχολική
ηλικία υπάρχουν ελάχιστα ερευνητικά δεδομένα και πληροφορίες. Η παρούσα εργασία
στοχεύει στη μελέτη των αποτελεσμάτων της εφαρμογής της συμπληρωματικής εξ
αποστάσεως μουσειακής εκπαίδευσης στο νηπιαγωγείο επιχειρώντας ταυτόχρονα τη
δημιουργία ενός εικονικού μουσείου που θα βασίζεται στα ενδιαφέροντα και στη
συμμετοχή των παιδιών στο πλαίσιο της εφαρμογής αυτής. Για τον σκοπό αυτό
αξιοποιήθηκε η έρευνα δράσης στην οποία συμμετείχαν δώδεκα νήπια του ολοήμερου
τμήματος νηπιαγωγείου καθώς και η εκπαιδευτικός-ερευνήτρια. Η συλλογή δεδομένων
στο πλαίσιο της έρευνας δράσης έγινε με τρεις διαφορετικές μεθόδους (συνέντευξη,
παρατήρηση, ημερολόγιο) και πηγών (γονείς, μαθητές, κριτικοί φίλοι). Τα
αποτελέσματα της έρευνας κρίνονται θετικά τόσο για το νηπιαγωγείο όσο και για
όλα τα εμπλεκόμενα μέλη (μαθητές, γονείς, εκπαιδευτικούς). Η μαθησιακή εμπειρία
των παιδιών εμπλουτίστηκε με ένα πιο σύγχρονο μαθησιακό περιβάλλον μέσα στο
οποίο καλλιέργησαν νέες χρήσιμες και σύγχρονες δεξιότητες, απέκτησαν καινούργιες
γνώσεις, ανέπτυξαν τη δημιουργικότητα και τη κριτική τους σκέψη και διαμόρφωσαν
θετική στάση απέναντι στα μουσεία;Distance Education is the new trend which
prevails in the field of education in recent years, which undertakes to cover
the contemporary needs of students, according to the requirements of the new era
of Information and Knowledge Society. We especially experienced the significance
of Distance Education, and some of its potentials, during the period of the
pandemic, when a new application, which was defined as “urgent” Distance
Education, constituted the main choice for the continuation of education, along
with all the particularities and difficulties that emerged. Nonetheless, there
are few research data and information as to its application in the pre-school
age. The present project aims to study the results of the implementation of
Complementary Distance Museum Education in pre-school, attempting concurrently
to create a virtual museum, which will be based on the interests and
participation of children in the framework of this implementation. The research
inquiries which framed the particular project relate to which requirements have
to be fulfilled through the Complementary Distance Education so that it can be
implemented in pre-school age, how the Complementary Distance Museum Education
can contribute to the education of pre-school children and in what way
Technology of Information and Communication can be deployed in Complementary
Distance Museum Education in pre-school education. For this purpose, Action
Research was deployed, as the educator- researcher scrutinizes the results of
the implementation of a new program and attempts to find solutions to a problem.
In the case of the present project, the problem arises from the difficulty in
accessing the local museums and the sites of cultural inheritance in general, in
Greece and abroad. The implementation of an innovative Distance Museum Education
program along with a creative use of Technology of Information and Communication
could be the solution to our problem. In addition, we need to highlight that
after our self-reflection during the pandemic period, closed schools and
museums, and the “urgent” Distance Education offered a new perspective and
stressed the importance of Distance Museum Education in pre-school even more. To
ensure the validity of the research the following were observed: an exhaustive
relevant literature review, planning of an appropriate schedule, use of a
representative sample, deployment of appropriate methodology/research tools and
use of sufficient sources. Based on the principles of triangulation, the data
was collected with the use of various methods, such as: a research diary was
kept by the educator- researcher throughout the data recording process,
resulting from the observation of children, the discussions/ interviews and the
educators personal thoughts, observation – direct non-participant observation
was deployed from the researcher and the critical friend for data collection ,
semi-structured interview- realized to record the thoughts and opinion of the
critical friend in relation to the implementation of Distance Museum Education
following the realization of the program, group discussions/ interviews- with
this method the children’s opinions on their experiences from the program
implementation were collected, questionnaire - for the probe of parent’s
opinions on the results of Distance Museum Education implementation in pre-
school. Twelve pre-school children of the all-day kindergartner participated in
the research, as well as the educator- researcher, a colleague kindergartner
teacher and the children’s parents. The Action Research was implemented in a
single-seat kindergartner of a village on Ikaria Island. In the specific
kindergartner, during the school year 2017- 2018 – that is before the pandemic -
two pre-school teachers served in the morning zone and afternoon zone
respectively. The all-day program was assigned to the educator- researcher for
the duration of the school year. The colleague of the morning zone assisted the
researcher in the research and took the part of the critical friend. For the
participation of the children in the research, parents were asked to sign the
parental consent form, after briefing. In a group discussion, the children’s
previous knowledge about museums was scouted and recorded in a concept map. From
the recording of children’s previous knowledge, it was ascertained that the
children have little to no knowledge and experience on museums. That was the
incentive to initiate the Museum Education program, and given that our school is
in the borderline, far from the great museums of the city and the world, we
decided to exploit all the potentials of Distance Education and Technology of
Information and Communication. In the beginning, we saw pictures/ photos of
museums on the computer, then we searched for information on the Internet about
museum professions and the types of the museums, we visited museums “virtually”,
we contacted via Skype the manager of the Toy Museum in Ermioni and finally, we
created our own virtual museum with the help of the Art steps program. Since the
subject of the program was defined, the educator- researcher planned
developmentally appropriate activities based on the needs and interests of the
children. The activities mainly dealt with the engagement of the children with
the computer and the Internet for two hours a day. The educator- researcher has
created the necessary software shortcuts and the photo folders on the desktop to
ensure easy access for the children and has also cared for the children to work
in pairs when they use the Technology of Information and Communication. The pre-
school children had the chance to work autonomously, to browse around the
museums virtually, to play, to observe the objects, to peer at them virtually
(to enlarge them, minimize them, to look inside e.t.c.). The children also had
the opportunity to create their own virtual museum, putting up pictures of toys
on a virtual display. The creation of a virtual museum by the children consisted
the amazing action of the program since they were able to apply all the
knowledge they gained during the educational intervention. During free
activities, the children could visit their own museum or whichever museum they
desired and as many times as they wanted to depending on their interests to
select their own course and engagement rate. The results of the research are
thought to be positive both for the kindergartner and all the parts involved
(students, parents, educators). The children displayed a great interest in the
program and learned new things. In particular, we noticed that the children
approached the concept of the modern museum, they realized that it is not just a
place that keeps old objects but it offers several social services, they also
understood the importance of cultural inheritance and its significance for the
modern man, the benefits and the role of Technology of Information and
Communication in Distance Museum approach. The children also acquired a positive
attitude towards museums and were looking forward to visit them live. The
parents also proved to be staunch supporters of the action, they filled in the
evaluation of the action questionnaire willingly, and they often briefed on the
children’s impressions when returning home. All parents expressed a positive
opinion on the specific program and they believe that it would be nice to
implement such programs or equivalent programs that bring children in touch with
the society and their culture. The particular research showed that interactive
creative activities, such as virtual tours in museums, the creation of a virtual
museum, interactive games/ applications on museum sites, as well as modern
communication through teleconference with the museum manager, apply to the
principles of distance school education and can contribute to pre-school
children’s learning experience. The prerequisites of Distance Museum Education
implementation totally comply with the basic principles of learning , as it
employs a multiform material (image, sound, text, video), it supports multiple
forms of learning (autonomous, experiential, collaborative, multi-sensory,
learning through play), it enables skills cultivation( crea
