Title: "Boys shouldn't have to just be boys": The role of art therapy in helping adolescent males to overcome harmful paradigms of masculinity
Authors: Nia Neumann
ID: openalex.W3100658574
URL: 

Studies of masculinity and its construction have been the subject of gender
studies for decades; however, perspectives on its nature and value are evolving.
Masculine denotes a particular and celebrated way of being in the world for
boys, and is perpetuated through institutions, families, peers and the media.
But what about those individuals who identify as male and do not represent
stereotypical qualities of masculinity? How does this incongruence complicate
their sense of identity or authenticity, and affect their relationships with
others? The common trope “boys will be boys” has reverberated through Western
society, dismissing male behavior as a simple and harmless inevitability of
biology. However, toxic masculinity, a narrow and restrictive description of
manhood which celebrates status, aggression, violence, anger and emotional
repression, has emerged and has been increasingly studied over the past decade
(O’Malley, 2016). Toxic masculinity is affecting the health of boys and men, and
securing more insidious consequences for all members of society. This
philosophical inquiry argues that art therapy can be used with adolescent males
to challenge the damaging and constricting parts of the social construct of
masculinity. Existing literature will be reviewed to explore why there is danger
in the perpetuation of toxic masculinity, strategies for conducting effective
therapy with adolescents and boys in particular, and how art therapists are
uniquely positioned to facilitate the repudiation of masculine paradigms using
specific art therapy approaches and interventions. The research will contend
that undermining the power of the traditional masculine paradigm using art
therapy techniques will allow today’s young men to address societal expectations
of masculinity, reconcile their true selves, thrive as healthy adults, and to
break violent and damaging intergenerational cycles of thought and behavior
which result in social inequality and oppression.
