Title: The Full Expression of Talanoa alofa: A Pedagogy to Enrich the Spiritual Wellbeing of Pasifika Children in Early Childhood Education from a Samoan Perspective
Authors: Merini Mauga
ID: openalex.W3013597964
URL: https://hdl.handle.net/10292/13137

This research explores the pedagogical ideas of the concept of “talanoa alofa”
from a Samoan perspective, and how it can help enrich the spiritual well-being
of Pasifika children, in Pasifika early childhood education (ECE) Aotearoa New
Zealand. The study exhibits the views of six Samoan early childhood education
(ECE) teachers (a mix of New Zealand born & Samoan born), about the concept of
talanoa alofa and spiritual wellbeing from their personal and professional lived
experiences. In addition, the study aims to contextualise the knowledge and
meaning/s that was discovered/rediscovered from the talatalanoaga into Pasifika
ECE. The study utilises the conceptual framework of talanoa as a qualitative
research design. Participants were invited to partake in individual talanoaga
sessions with the researcher. This gave them a place to freely express
themselves and share their thoughts, wisdoms, knowledges and understanding about
the topic of interest. Most importantly, it gave them an opportunity to tap into
their own spirits to rethink, reflect, reconnect and appreciate their upbringing
and lived experiences as positive contribution, to who they have become as
Pasifika people in their home countries and Aotearoa New Zealand, especially as
parents and educators. Weaving together the meanings, wisdoms and knowledges
that were discovered and produced through the talanoaga between the researcher,
participants and the literature, this brought about a deeper understanding about
the phenomenon. Talanoa alofa is defined in this research as a concept that is
derived from the combination, of the term/practise talanoa and the
value/principle of alofa. The influence of fa’akerisiano (Christianity) and
fa’asamoa (Samoan culture) is also evident in these discussions. In addition,
talanoa alofa is identified in the research as one of the most important ways of
parenting in the Samoan cultural view. Hence, our proverbs “O tama a manu e
fafaga i fuga o laau, a’o tama a tagata e fafaga i upu ma tala” (The offspring
of the birds are fed with flowers but the offspring of people are fed with words
and stories), O au o matua fanau (The pinnacle of a parents eye are their
children). “E leai se gaumata’u na’o le gaualofa” (What you do out of love or
with love nurtures and endures - fear does the opposite)” (Tui Atua, 2009,
p.54). Furthermore, the relationship between talanoa alofa as a pedagogy,
holistic learning and spiritual well-being is identified, examined and discussed
in this research. In addition, factors that would possibly influence the
implementing of talanoa alofa as a pedagogy are also highlighted and examined.
