Title: Why do people own horses? The experiences of highly involved dressage hose owners in the United Kingdom.
Authors: Darcy Bornemann
ID: openalex.W4200343316
URL: https://doi.org/10.46289/gh93kf12

Horse ownership is simplistically defined through the possession of a horse;
however, the logistics of keeping horses and using horses are evidenced as far
more complex than the mere ownership of an object. Although it is understood
horses and humans develop a relationship built on a mutual communication system,
the horse is more the focus of the relationship than the human despite humans’
position of power as the possessor. The existing areas of research seek to
describe the equestrian population, the physiology and biomechanics of the horse
rider, and the culture of human-horse relationships. Missing from these,
however, is the underlying motivation to own horses, because humans can access
horses without ownership. This thesis uses an inductive qualitative approach to
investigate the motivations for dressage horse ownership (because equestrians
appear to self-segregate by competitive discipline). Twenty-one highly involved
dressage horse owners ranging in age, experience, and professional affiliation
with horses were interviewed. Two core themes emerged. The core theme ‘Getting
Into Horses’ is composed of people’s discussions around becoming horse owners
and has two motivation themes: ‘Always Wanted’ and ‘Securing the Horse’.
Respectively, these comprise people’s attraction to horses and how they first
became horse owners. The core theme of ‘Horse-Human Interaction’ is composed of
people’s discussion regarding their interactions with the horses they own and
contains two motivation themes: ‘Caregiving’ and ‘Using the Horse’.
Respectively, these cover how caring for the horse is motiving and how riding
and training is motivating for ownership. All the themes come together to form a
novel theory of horse ownership motivation. The horse ownership theory is
explained by utilising four other theories. Biophilia explains the initial
attraction to horses. Self-determination theory explains how horse ownership is
fulfilling of humans’ basic psychological needs of autonomy, competency, and
relatedness. Attachment theory and achievement goal theory work in conjunction
with self-determination theory to further explain why human-horse interactions
are fulfilling of relatedness and competency needs. Horse ownership is motivated
by the ability to control the decision-making regarding the horse, which becomes
important as humans begin interacting with horses and experience satisfaction
through their subsequent relationship with the horse. Furthermore, ownership
protects the human-horse relationship because ownership provides the power to
control decision-making.
