Title: Stories Told and Untold: Confidentiality Laws and the Master Narrative of Child Welfare
Authors: Matthew I. Fraidin
ID: openalex.W1588858729
URL: https://digitalcommons.law.udc.edu/fac_journal_articles/60

In most states, child welfare hearings and records are sealed or confidential.
This means that by law, court hearings and records may not be observed. The same
laws and court rules also preclude those who are authorized to enter and watch
from discussing anything learned or observed in a closed courtroom or from a
sealed court record with anyone not involved in the case. It is the restriction
on speech—on telling stories about child welfare—with which this Article is
concerned. I will argue in this Article that the insights of narrative theory
and agenda-setting studies help us understand the damaging consequences of
confidentiality laws. Child welfare is characterized by a single, “master
narrative,” or overarching description of conditions and phenomena that
explains, or purports to explain, the field.1 The master narrative gathers the
stories of child welfare and unifies them into a single, coherent, commonly-
accepted image. It is the way child welfare issues are understood. In short, the
master narrative of child welfare depicts foster care as a haven for “child-
victims”2 savagely brutalized by “deviant,”3\n“monstrous”4 parents.
Notwithstanding this shared public understanding, however, most children in
foster care are alleged to have experienced neglect—deprivation of food,
clothing, shelter, education, or another necessity of life—not physical abuse.
There is also a growing understanding that some children in foster care ought
not to be there at all. In addition, research and experience indicate that many
maltreated children would be better off if simply left at home—with those
responsible for the maltreatment—rather than placed in foster care.5\nIn Part II
of this Article, I explain the concept of the master narrative, and present
research about agenda-setting and issue-framing. I then present contrasting
stories of child welfare, the “master narrative,” and an alternative story. The
former reflects widespread popular conceptions of children, parents, the foster
care system, and the executive and judicial branches of government; the
alternative story is told by weaving the stories of individual children and
parents with data and findings by child welfare researchers. In Part III, I set
forth current laws and court rules that regulate admission to and disclosure of
child welfare court hearings and records. In this Part, I share stories of two
foster youths who sought to tell their own stories, but were confronted with
attempts to silence them. In Part IV, I argue that confidentiality laws
perpetuate the disjunction between the widely-accepted master narrative of child
welfare and the alternative story of child welfare. I argue that confidentiality
laws harm children and their parents by silencing their voices and suppressing
their stories.
