Title: The Roots of Bioinformatics
Authors: David B. Searls
ID: openalex.W2117630412
URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000809

Every new scientific discipline or methodology reaches a point in its maturation
where it is fruitful for it to turn its gaze inward, as well as backward. Such
introspection helps to clarify the essential structure of a field of study,
facilitating communication, pedagogy, standardization, and the like, while
retrospection aids this process by accounting for its beginnings and
underpinnings.    In this spirit, PLoS Computational Biology is launching a new
series of themed articles tracing the roots of bioinformatics. Essays from
prominent workers in the field will relate how selected scientific,
technological, economic, and even cultural threads came to influence the
development of the field we know today. These are not intended to be review
articles, nor personal reminiscences, but rather narratives from individual
perspectives about the origins and foundations of bioinformatics, and are
expected to provide both historical and technical insights. Ideally, these
articles will offer an archival record of the field's development, as well as a
human face on an important segment of science, for the benefit of current and
future workers.    Upcoming articles, already commissioned, will cover the roots
of bioinformatics in structural biology, in evolutionary biology, and in
artificial intelligence, with more in the works. These topics are obviously very
broad, and so are likely to be subdivided or otherwise revisited in future
installments by authors with varying perspectives. Topics and authors will be
chosen at the discretion of the editors along lines broadly corresponding to the
usual content of this journal.    The author, having been asked to serve as
Series Editor by the Editor-in-Chief, will endeavor to maintain a uniform flow
of articles solicited from luminaries in the field. As a starting point to the
series, I offer below a few vignettes and reflections on some longer-term
influences that have shaped the discipline. I first consider the unique status
of bioinformatics vis-a-vis science and technology, and then explore historical
trends in biology and related fields that anticipated and prepared the way for
bioinformatics. Examining the context of key moments when computers were first
taken up by early adopters reveals how deep the roots of bioinformatics go.
