Title: Getting by high school : identity formation and the educational achievements of Punjabi young men in Surrey, B.C.
Authors: Heather Frost
ID: openalex.W2406542208
URL: https://doi.org/10.14288/1.0071569

This thesis is concerned with the lives and educational achievements of young
Indo-Canadians, specifically the high school aged sons of Punjabi parents who
immigrated to Canada beginning in the 1970s, and who were born or who have had
the majority of their schooling in Canada’s public school system. I examine how
these young people develop and articulate a sense of who they are in the context
of their parents’ immigration and the extent to which their identities are
determined and conditioned by their everyday lives. I also grapple with the
implications of identity formation for the educational achievements of second
generation youth by addressing how the identity choices made by young Punjabi
Canadian men influence their educational performances. Using data collected by
the Ministry of Education of British Columbia, I develop a quantitative profile
of the educational achievements of Punjabi students enrolled in public secondary
schools in the Greater Vancouver Region. This profile indicates that while most
Punjabi students are completing secondary school, many, particularly the young
men, are graduating with grade point averages at the lower end of the continuum
and are failing to meet provincial expectations in Foundation Skills
Assessments. To understand the identities and educational experiences of young
Punjabi men, I conducted semi-structured interviews with prominent community
members, teachers, school administrators and young Punjabi men and women
attending Getting By High School, a public secondary school in Surrey, B.C. I
apply the theory of segmented assimilation as formulated by sociologists Portes
and Rumbaut (2001a) and work with the concept of masculinities from critical
men’s studies to describe the linkages between place, identity and educational
achievements by evaluating the effects of school, family and community contexts
on the lives and identities of the 15 young men I interviewed. I argue that for
this group of young men, life in Surrey’s Indo-Canadian community has provided
the conditions for the development of a “brown” identity which while protecting
them from the pernicious “Jack” has translated into a lack of scholastic effort
and academic mediocrity. I conclude by addressing the implications of my
findings for the theory of segmented assimilation.
