Title: 'Becoming Me': perceptions of identity and self-efficacy among Australian and Saudi Arabian Muslim girls
Authors: Najah El-Biza
ID: openalex.W70512726
URL: https://ro.uow.edu.au/theses/3328

This study sought to uncover the perceptions of self-efficacy and personal
identity of Australian Muslim girls in private Islamic schools and those in
public schools. It aimed to explore how the social and cultural contexts of the
girls have influenced their experiences using their own voices. Insight into the
self-efficacy and identity of Muslim girls in Saudi Arabia gave the study a
distinctive and worthy addition. The external context of education has changed
and with global events creating an environment for Muslim children that is both
threatening and challenging to their sense of place, it was appropriate at the
time to investigate how children described their identity and self-
efficacy.\nThe pertinent theories to this study of identity, hybridity, and
self-efficacy were explored portraying the importance of understanding how
children are continuously negotiating their possible identities within various
experiences and contexts. This study employed the interpretive paradigm, which
underlies qualitative methods to illuminate the central questions asked about
the identity and self-efficacy of Muslim primary school girls. A mixed method
case study research approach was considered a suitable methodological framework
for this study as it united the qualitative exploration of the girls own spoken
narratives in their natural setting with the quantitative use of pre-structured
data.\nThe data collected during this study included student questionnaires,
student interviews, teacher focus groups and teacher questionnaires. This study
was undertaken in seven primary school settings where 125 students from Years 5
and 6 from schools in Australia and Saudi Arabia participated. Of these
students, 74 were from two public schools and three private Islamic schools in
Australia. From among these students, eight girls from the private schools and
13 girls from the public schools participated in the interviews. In addition, 51
students from both a private international school and a public school in Saudi
Arabia completed the survey. Ten teachers also took part in the focus groups and
questionnaires. The data gathered from this research were analysed by applying a
coding system, set out by Strauss and Corbin (1998), which includes open, axial
and selective coding.\nA number of salient concepts have been raised in this
study underlying theoretical concerns of identity formation and self-efficacy
that can help illuminate the sense of place and sense of self of pre-adolescent
Muslim girls. Emerging themes of significance to this study revolved around
theories of multiple identities, Islamic identity and hybridity. The primary
idea of ‘becoming’ rather than ‘being’ was a recurring theme. The concept of
Islamic identity raised issues of cultural capital, shared cultural codes,
separateness, and stereotypical views of ‘other’ and ‘visibility’ of Muslim
girls. The investigation of self-efficacy accentuated the researchers aim to
consider how these young Muslim girls perceived themselves as individuals and in
relation to their home, school and community contexts in the current, often
hostile, global environment.\nThe thesis concludes with recommendations and
important implications for providing new avenues for researchers, teachers and
leaders of schools to develop insightful, relevant and appropriate policies and
programs that will assist pre-adolescent Muslims in developing a positive self-
identity and higher levels of perceived self-efficacy. The need for a concept
such as ‘interculturality’ is highlighted as a possible solution for both
minority and mainstream students.
