Title: The study of factors affecting breastfeeding uptake and duration within Somali women
Authors: Huda Diab
ID: openalex.W151253195
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10034/127946

It is widely recognized that human breast-milk is optimal for the normal healthy
growth and development of the infant. A wide range of literature is available
with evidence clearly demonstrating the benefits of breastfeeding and the impact
of exclusive breastfeeding on the baby. Despite this breastfeeding initiation
rates in the UK remain amongst the lowest in Europe and especially in the North
West of England. The basis of this research was to unveil the factors which
relate to breastfeeding uptake and duration, and also to find out whether or not
these agree with previous findings. Participants were recruited from ‘Somali
Women’s’ community centres in Liverpool. Results were obtained through two focus
groups. Findings from focus group 1 show that although most women choose to
breastfed initially, half of the participants had to stop within six months due
to starting another pregnancy. In some cases the women felt mix-feeding was more
efficient because the baby appeared to remain hungry between feeding times when
fed solely on breast milk. A combination of both self determination and family
support lead to a longer breastfeeding duration amongst this group. Results from
focus group 2 were similar but most participants spoke very poor English leading
to a language barrier between them and the hospital staff. All participants were
of Muslim faith; and religion played a key factor in their determination to
continue breast feeding up to six months and longer. Findings from this study in
line with previous investigations, illustrated the need for better
communication, with and education of, pregnant mothers to give them a greater
understanding of the benefits of breast feeding. Findings show that there are
many determinants to long-term breastfeeding and parents need to work together
when infant feeding choices are made. Antenatal support influences long-term
decisions. Private places for women need to be made more readily available for
breastfeeding women outside of their homes, and further flexibility provided for
working mothers.
