Title: The origins of 12-month attachment: A microanalysis of 4-month mother–infant interaction
Authors: Beatrice Beebe, Joseph Jaffe, Sara Markese, Karen A. Buck, Henian Chen
ID: openalex.W2103833506
URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/14616730903338985

A microanalysis of 4-month mother-infant face-to-face communication revealed a
fine-grained specification of communication processes that predicted 12-month
insecure attachment outcomes, particularly resistant and disorganized
classifications. An urban community sample of 84 dyads were videotaped at 4
months during a face-to-face interaction, and at 12 months during the Ainsworth
Strange Situation. Four-month mother and infant communication modalities of
attention, affect, touch, and spatial orientation were coded from split-screen
videotape on a 1 s time base; mother and infant facial-visual "engagement"
variables were constructed. We used contingency measures (multi-level time-
series modeling) to examine the dyadic temporal process over time, and specific
rates of qualitative features of behavior to examine the content of behavior.
Self-contingency (auto-correlation) measured the degree of stability/lability
within an individual's own rhythms of behavior; interactive contingency (lagged
cross-correlation) measured adjustments of the individual's behavior that were
correlated with the partner's previous behavior. We documented that both self-
and interactive contingency, as well as specific qualitative features, of mother
and infant behavior were mechanisms of attachment formation by 4 months,
distinguishing 12-month insecure, resistant, and disorganized attachment
classifications from secure; avoidant were too few to test. All communication
modalities made unique contributions. The separate analysis of different
communication modalities identified intermodal discrepancies or conflict, both
intrapersonal and interpersonal, that characterized insecure dyads. Contrary to
dominant theories in the literature on face-to-face interaction, measures of
maternal contingent coordination with infant yielded the fewest associations
with 12-month attachment, whereas mother and infant self-contingency, and infant
contingent coordination with mother, yielded comparable numbers of findings.
Rather than the more usual hypothesis that more contingency is "better," we
partially supported our hypothesis that 12-month insecurity is associated with
both higher and lower 4-month self- and interactive contingency values than
secure, as a function of mother vs. infant and communication modality. Thus, in
the origins of attachment security, more contingency is not necessarily better.
A remarkable degree of differentiation was identified in the 4-month patterns of
"future" C and D infants, classified as resistant and disorganized,
respectively, at 12 months. The central feature of future C dyads was
dysregulated tactile and spatial exchanges, generating approach-withdrawal
patterns. The intact maternal contingent coordination overall safeguards the
future C infant's interactive agency. However, future C infants likely come to
expect maternal spatial/tactile impingement, and to expect to "dodge" as mothers
"chase." They managed maternal touch by tuning it out, sacrificing their ability
to communicate about maternal touch. They "approached" by vigilantly
coordinating their facial-visual engagement with maternal facial-visual
engagement, but they "withdrew" by inhibiting their facial-visual engagement
coordination with maternal touch. We proposed that future C infants will have
difficulty feeling sensed and known during maternal spatial/tactile
impingements. The central feature of future D dyads is intrapersonal and
interpersonal discordance or conflict in the context of intensely distressed
infants. Lowered maternal contingent coordination, and failures of maternal
affective correspondence, constituted maternal emotional withdrawal from
distressed infants, compromising infant interactive agency and emotional
coherence. The level of dysregulation in future D dyads was thus of an entirely
different order than that of future C dyads. We proposed that the future D
infant represents not being sensed and known by the mother, particularly in
states of distress. We proposed that the emerging internal working model of
future D infants includes confusion about their own basic emotional
organization, about their mothers' emotional organization, and about their
mothers' response to their distress, setting a trajectory in development which
may disturb the fundamental integration of the person. The findings have rich
implications for clinical intervention, with remarkable specificity for
different kinds of mother and infant distress. Heightened and lowered self- and
interactive contingency, in different modalities, as well as the specific
behavioral qualities identified, provide a more differentiated set of concepts
to guide clinical intervention.
