Title: From a “Student” to a Lifelong “Consumer” of Education? Constructions of Educability in Adult Students’ Narrative Life Histories
Authors: Päivi Siivonen
ID: openalex.W3127714740
URL: http://urn.fi/URN:ISBN:978-952-5401-95-0

The focus of this study was to examine the constructions of the educable subject
of the lifelong learning (LLL) narrative in the narrative life histories of
adult students at general upper secondary school for adults (GUSSA). In this
study lifelong learning has been defined as a cultural narrative on education,
“a system of political thinking” that is not internally consistent, but has
contradictory themes embedded within it (Billig et al., 1988). As earlier
research has shown and this study also confirms, the LLL narrative creates
differences between those who are included and those who fall behind and are
excluded from the learning society ideal. Educability expresses socially
constructed interpretations on who benefit from education and who should be
educated and how. The presupposition in this study has been that contradictions
between the LLL narrative and the so-called traditional constructions of
educability are likely to be constructed as the former relies on the all-
inclusive interpretation of educability and the latter on the meritocratic model
of educating individuals based on their innate abilities. The school system
continues to uphold the institutionalized ethos of educability that ranks
students into the categories “bright”, “mediocre”, and “poor” (Räty & Snellman,
1998) on the basis of their abilities, including gender-related differences as
well as differences based on social class. Traditional agerelated norms also
persist, for example general upper secondary education is normatively completed
in youth and not in adulthood, and the formal learning context continues to
outweigh both non-formal and informal learning. Moreover, in this study the
construction of social differences in relation to educability and, thereafter
unequal access to education has been examined in relation to age, social class,
and gender. The biographical work of the research participants forms a peephole
that permits the examination of the dilemmatic nature of the constructions of
educability in this study. Formal general upper secondary education in adulthood
is situated on the border between the traditional and the LLL narratives on
educability: participation in GUSSA inevitably means that one’s ability and
competence as a student and learner becomes reassessed through the assessment
criteria maintained by schools, whereas according to the principles of LLL
everyone is educable; everyone is encouraged to learn throughout their lives
regardless of age, social class, or gender. This study is situated in the field
of adult education, sociology of education, and social psychological research on
educability, having also been informed by feminist studies. Moreover, this study
contributes to narrative life history research combining the structural analysis
of narratives (Labov & Waletzky, 1997), i.e. mini-stories within life history,
with the analysis of the life histories as structural and thematic wholes and
the creation of coherence in them; thus, permitting both micro and macro
analyses. On accounting for the discontinuity created by participation in
general upper secondary school study in adulthood and not normatively in youth,
the GUSSA students construct coherence in relation to their ability and
competence as students and learners. The seven case studies illuminate the
social differences constructed in relation to educability, i.e. social class,
gender, age, and the “new category of student and learner”. In the data of this
study, i.e. 20 general upper secondary school adult graduates’ narrative life
histories primarily generated through interviews, two main coherence patterns of
the adult educable subject emerge. The first performance-oriented pattern
displays qualities that are closely related to the principles of LLL. Contrary
to the principles of lifewide learning, however, the documentation of one’s
competence through formal qualifications outweighs non-formal and informal
learning in preparation for future change and the competition for further
education, professional careers, and higher social positions. The second
flexible learning pattern calls into question the status of formal, especially
theoretical and academically oriented education; inner development is seen as
more important than such external signs of development – grades and
certificates. Studying and learning is constructed as a hobby and as a means to
a more satisfactory life as opposed to a socially and culturally valued serious
occupation leading to further education and career development. Consequently, as
a curious, active, and independent learner, this educable but not readily
employable subject is pushed into the periphery of lifelong learning. These two
coherence patterns of the adult educable subject illuminate who is to be
educated and how. The educable and readily employable LLL subject is to
participate in formal education in order to achieve qualifications for working
life, whereas the educable but not employable subject may utilize lifewide
learning for her/his own pleasure.
