Title: Bringing Medicine to the Hamlet: Exploring the Experiences of Older Women in Rural Bangladesh Who Seek Health Care
Authors: Md. Abul Hossen
ID: openalex.W143480740
URL: https://scholars.wlu.ca/etd/1106

The purpose of this study was to explore the experiences of older women in rural
Bangladesh who seek health care. Qualitative methods were used to collect data
from 17 older women in Bibirchar Union, Sherpur District, Bangladesh in June
2006. The study is intended to generate findings to help policy makers plan
appropriate strategies to improve the health of this highly vulnerable
population group.\nThe findings reveal that women’s culturally and socially
determined roles greatly impair their health and play an important role in
health-seeking behaviour through a complex web of social, economic,
religious/cultural and behavioural interrelationships and synergies that pervade
every aspect of their lives. Both demand factors—which include age, gender,
cost, quality, geographic accessibility, availability of resources, the
seriousness of the condition, and traditional and religious beliefs—and supply
factors which include health system barriers such as perceived high cost of
health services, geographical distance, scarcity of female health workers,
understaffing, inadequate supply of drugs, discrimination and disrespectful
treatment based on class, age and gender lead to reduced use of health
services.\nThe social determinants of health perspective informing the study
shapes the conclusion that there is an urgent need for changes to the publicly
funded health care system that would make it more accessible to older women in
Bibirchar. These changes include ensuring an adequate supply of medications and
equipment in the primary health centres, provision of free medications, and
training of health service providers in geriatrics. Further, it is recommended
that the referral system among the various health services be strengthened,
collaboration between traditional health providers and modern health providers
be provided, and that spiritual beliefs be integrated into health care
provision. Training in how to treat older patients respectfully is recommended
for all health providers working in government-funded organizations as is the
hiring of more female health care providers. Incentives to attract physicians to
work in publicly-funded facilities in rural areas are suggested and provision of
free hospital and preventive testing services for older adults.\nIn the longer
term, recommendations are made that would increase the status, respect and
resources commanded by older women in Bangladesh. These include health promotion
programs to change public attitudes about the importance of providing health
care to older women, investment in the social development of rural areas in
Bangladesh, empowering local communities in health care decision making, and
enhancement of economic opportunities for women. Finally a need is identified to
redefine health from a limited understanding of it as “the absence of disease”
to one grounded in a determinants of health perspective.
