Title: The anatomy of anatomy: A review for its modernization
Authors: Kapil Sugand, Peter Abrahams, Ashish Khurana
ID: openalex.W1964809186
URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/ase.139

Anatomy has historically been a cornerstone in medical education regardless of
nation or specialty. Until recently, dissection and didactic lectures were its
sole pedagogy. Teaching methodology has been revolutionized with more reliance
on models, imaging, simulation, and the Internet to further consolidate and
enhance the learning experience. Moreover, modern medical curricula are giving
less importance to anatomy education and to the acknowledged value of
dissection. Universities have even abandoned dissection completely in favor of
user-friendly multimedia, alternative teaching approaches, and newly defined
priorities in clinical practice. Anatomy curriculum is undergoing international
reformation but the current framework lacks uniformity among institutions.
Optimal learning content can be categorized into the following modalities: (1)
dissection/prosection, (2) interactive multimedia, (3) procedural anatomy, (4)
surface and clinical anatomy, and (5) imaging. The importance of multimodal
teaching, with examples suggested in this article, has been widely recognized
and assessed. Nevertheless, there are still ongoing limitations in anatomy
teaching. Substantial problems consist of diminished allotted dissection time
and the number of qualified anatomy instructors, which will eventually
deteriorate the quality of education. Alternative resources and strategies are
discussed in an attempt to tackle these genuine concerns. The challenges are to
reinstate more effective teaching and learning tools while maintaining the
beneficial values of orthodox dissection. The UK has a reputable medical
education but its quality could be improved by observing international
frameworks. The heavy penalty of not concentrating on sufficient anatomy
education will inevitably lead to incompetent anatomists and healthcare
professionals, leaving patients to face dire repercussions.
