Title: Securing Okinawa for Miscegenation: A Historical and Literary Discourse Analysis of Amerasians in Okinawa, 1945-2000
Authors: Annmaria M. Shimabuku
ID: openalex.W2129257027
URL: https://hdl.handle.net/1813/14805

Through an extensive collection of journalistic, archival, and literary
materials, I illustrate the establishment, maintenance, and controversy
surrounding miscegenation between U.S. military men and Okinawan women
specifically from the standpoint of Amerasians that were born as a result
thereof. As Okinawans were exposed to the raw violence of extraterritoriality of
the U.S. military?most frequently expressed through the trope of sexual
violence?an escape from that violence was quickly configured as a recuperation
or increased protection of state sovereignty. In this way, journalists,
politicians, and activists have frequently used mixed-blood children as the
?evidence? in a juridical model to prove the ?fact? of oppression. However, in a
declension into biopolitics via three genealogists Nietzsche, Weber, and
Foucault, I illustrate the assumptions implicit in this claim. The state is
posited as a repressive institution that a political group known as ?we? must
resist. Here, metaphor is misconceived as the relationship between the state as
an external force that exerts violence onto individual bodies that are in turn
called to arms in the name of resistance. However, this rests on a causal
understanding between the doer and the deed, or a political will that can be
realized through sheer tenacity. Instead, I show through Nietzsche how this
function of metaphor is repressed to give rise to the fiction of a causal agent.
Furthermore, I inflect my reading of metaphor with biopolitics through
Esposito?s account of Nietzsche. That is, the state is not merely the repressive
power that threatens life, but it must be articulated in conjunction with the
power to secure life. The biopolitical state is concerned with the life of the
population at large and the power of the state becomes literally infused through
the veins of human bodies. This dissertation gambles with the hope of dislodging
Amerasians from a damning biopolitical dilemma: seeds of destruction of a
genocidal rape (of women as victims) that must be contained to secure the
Okinawan population at large or Amerasians as the embodiment of the ?success? of
Okinawa?s ability to secure entry into a liberalized global economy (via the
bodies of women as free-willing agents).
