Title: Bicultural Identity Negotiation
Authors: Sun No, Ching Wan, Melody Manchi Chao, Jennifer L. Rosner, Ying‐yi Hong
ID: openalex.W2241948621
URL: https://doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511779374.018

Increased intercultural contacts within and across national boundaries have
raised pressing questions for individuals and societies such as: How do
individuals make sense of themselves as multicultural beings? How can societies
cultivate the benefits of increased heterogeneity within its populace (e.g.,
creativity and productivity) and simultaneously resolve possible intergroup
tensions? How can social policies be formulated to foster an overarching
inclusive identity for all members from different ethnic and cultural
backgrounds? Consider the fact that the 2005 riots in France (along with a
shorter-lived repeat in 2007), and the terrorist attacks in Britain during the
summers of 2005 and 2007, can be partially attributed to ethnic minority youths’
perceived exclusion from the mainstream society (Sciolino, 2007; Smith, 2005).
There is no doubt that high rates of unemployment due to racial and religious
discrimination, along with perceptions of police insensitivity, combined to fuel
weeks of violence and car burnings across France. The anger and frustration felt
by French-born and France-identified youth and by young adults of Arab and
African ancestry regarding belonging and acceptance had long preceded these
events, however. A Time Europe Magazine special report on the cause of the riots
provided insight into the tensions behind identity and exclusion: “The young men
behind the violence ‘are rioting, not because they hate the Republic,’ says
Dounia Bouzar, an anthropologist who has worked extensively with [public housing
project] delinquents, ‘but because they want to be included in it’ ” (Geary
&amp; Graff, 2005). Incidents such as the French riots underscore the pressing
need to understand identity negotiations within multicultural settings. Although
there have been attempts to examine these processes from a psychological
standpoint, these issues have yet to be adequately addressed, and the available
research is widely scattered within topics such as immigration, mixed-race
peoples, ethnic identity, and intercultural communication. In this chapter, we
propose a framework for examining bicultural identity negotiation processes,
which we consider to be a subset of multicultural identity negotiation. Our
objective in introducing this framework is to stimulate further research on this
timely topic in the current era of hyperconnectivity within and across national
boundaries. Through our model, we also aim to direct attention to the view of
bicultural identities as continuously unfolding coconstructions linked to
personal resources, situation-embedded goals, and even specific interaction
partners. © Cambridge University Press 2011.
