Title: How Evolution Learns to Generalise: Principles of under-fitting, over-fitting and induction in the evolution of developmental organisation
Authors: Kostas Kouvaris, Jeff Clune, Louis Kounios, Markus Brede, Richard A. Watson
ID: 1508.06854
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1508.06854

Abstract:
One of the most intriguing questions in evolution is how organisms exhibit suitable phenotypic variation to rapidly adapt in novel selective environments which is crucial for evolvability. Recent work showed that when selective environments vary in a systematic manner, it is possible that development can constrain the phenotypic space in regions that are evolutionarily more advantageous. Yet, the underlying mechanism that enables the spontaneous emergence of such adaptive developmental constraints is poorly understood. How can natural selection, given its myopic and conservative nature, favour developmental organisations that facilitate adaptive evolution in future previously unseen environments? Such capacity suggests a form of \textit{foresight} facilitated by the ability of evolution to accumulate and exploit information not only about the particular phenotypes selected in the past, but regularities in the environment that are also relevant to future environments. Here we argue that the ability of evolution to discover such regularities is analogous to the ability of learning systems to generalise from past experience. Conversely, the canalisation of evolved developmental processes to past selective environments and failure of natural selection to enhance evolvability in future selective environments is directly analogous to the problem of over-fitting and failure to generalise in machine learning. We show that this analogy arises from an underlying mechanistic equivalence by showing that conditions corresponding to those that alleviate over-fitting in machine learning enhance the evolution of generalised developmental organisations under natural selection. This equivalence provides access to a well-developed theoretical framework that enables us to characterise the conditions where natural selection will find general rather than particular solutions to environmental conditions.
