Title: When the clock strikes: Modeling the relation between circadian rhythms and cardiac arrhythmias
Authors: Pavithraa Seenivasan, Shakti N. Menon, S. Sridhar, Sitabhra Sinha
ID: 1609.09326
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.09326

Abstract:
It has recently been observed that the occurrence of sudden cardiac death has a close statistical relationship with the time of day, viz., ventricular fibrillation is most likely to occur between 12 am-6 am, with 6 pm-12 am being the next most likely period. Consequently there has been significant interest in understanding how cardiac activity is influenced by the circadian clock, i.e., temporal oscillations in physiological activity with a period close to 24 hours and synchronized with the day-night cycle. Although studies have identified the genetic basis of circadian rhythms at the intracellular level, the mechanisms by which they influence cardiac pathologies are not yet fully understood. Evidence has suggested that diurnal variations in the conductance properties of ion channel proteins that govern the excitation dynamics of cardiac cells may provide the crucial link. In this paper, we investigate the relationship between the circadian rhythm as manifested in modulations of ion channel properties and the susceptibility to cardiac arrhythmias by using a mathematical model that describes electrical activity in ventricular tissue. We show that changes in the channel conductance that lead to extreme values for the duration of action potentials in cardiac cells can result either in abnormally high-frequency reentrant activity or spontaneous conduction block of excitation waves. Both phenomena increase the likelihood of wavebreaks that are known to initiate potentially life-threatening arrhythmias. Thus, disruptive cardiac excitation dynamics are most likely to occur in time-intervals of the day-night cycle during which the channel properties are closest to these extreme values, providing an intriguing relation between circadian rhythms and cardiac pathologies.
