Title: Metabolic enrichment through functional gene rules
Authors: Davide Maspero, Claudio Isella, Marzia Di Filippo, Alex Graudenzi, Sara Erika Bellomo, Marco Antoniotti, Giancarlo Mauri, Enzo Medico, Chiara Damiani
ID: 1710.06017
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.06017

Abstract:
It is well known that tumors originating from the same tissue have different prognosis and sensitivity to treatments. Over the last decade, cancer genomics consortia like the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) have been generating thousands of cross-sectional data, for thousands of human primary tumors originated from various tissues. Thanks to that public database, it is today possible to analyze a broad range of relevant information such as gene sequences, expression profiles or metabolite footprints, to capture tumor molecular heterogeneity and improve patient stratification and clinical management. To this aim, it is common practice to analyze datasets grouped into clusters based on clinical observations and/or molecular features. However, the identification of specific properties of each cluster that may be effectively targeted by therapeutic drugs still represents a challenging task. We define a method to generate an activity score for the metabolic reactions of different clusters of patients based on their transcriptional profile. This approach reduces the number of variables from many genes to few reactions, by aggregating transcriptional information associated to the same enzymatic reaction according to gene-enzyme and enzyme-reaction rules. We also applied the methodology to a dataset of 244 RNAseq transcriptional profiles taken from patients with colorectal cancer (CRC). CRC samples are typically divided into two sub-types: (i) tumors with microsatellite instability (MSI), associated with hyper-mutation and with CpG island methylation phenotype, and (ii) microsatellite stable (MSS) tumors, typically endowed with chromosomal instability. We report some key differences in the central carbon metabolism of the two clusters. We also show how the method can be used to describe the metabolism of individual patients and cluster them exclusively based on metabolic features.
