Title: The influence of AGEs and enzymatic cross-links on the mechanical properties of collagen fibrils
Authors: Julia Kamml, Chun-Yu Ke, Claire Acevedo, David Kammer
ID: 2301.13010
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.13010

Abstract:
Cross-links are considered to be a key component of collagen fibrils as they can change the fibrillar behavior in various ways. Advanced-Glycation Endproducts (AGEs), one particular type of cross-links, have been shown to accumulate and impair the mechanical properties of collageneous tissues, whereas enzymatic cross-links (ECLs) are known for stabilizing the structure of the fibril. However, the reasons for whether a given type of cross-link improves or impairs the material properties remain unknown. Here, we use coarse-grained steered molecular models to evaluate the effect of AGEs and ECLs cross-links content on the deformation and failure properties of collagen fibrils. Our simulations show that the collagen fibrils stiffen at high strain levels when the AGEs content exceeds a critical value. In addition, the strength of the fibril increases with AGEs accumulation. By analyzing the forces within the different types of cross-links (AGEs and ECLs) as well as their failure, we demonstrate that a change of deformation mechanism is at the origin of these observations. A high AGEs content reinforces force transfer through AGEs cross-links rather than through friction between sliding tropocollagen molecules. We show that this failure mechanism, which is associated with lower energy dissipation, results in more abrupt failure of the collagen fibril. Our results provide a direct and causal link between increased AGEs content, inhibited intra-fibrillar sliding, increased stiffness, and abrupt fibril fracture. Therefore, they explain the mechanical origin of bone brittleness as commonly observed in elderly and diabetic populations. Our findings contribute to a better understanding of the mechanisms underlying impaired tissue behaviour due to elevated AGEs content and could enable targeted measures regarding the reduction of specific collagen cross-linking levels.
