Title: Nutritional composition and bioactive compounds of mini watermelon genotypes in Bangladesh
Authors: Hasina Sultana, Sharmila Rani Mallick, Jahidul Hassan, Joydeb Gomasta, Md. Humayun Kabir, Md. Sakibul Alam Sakib, Mahmuda Hossen, Muhammad Mustakim Billah, Emrul Kayesh
ID: 2309.13565
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.13565

Abstract:
Given the present rising trends in changing lifestyle and consumption patterns, watermelon production has shifted from big to small-sized fruits having desirable quality attributes. Hence, analyses of fruit quality traits of mini watermelon are crucial to develop improved cultivars with enhanced nutritional compositions, consumer-preferred traits and extended storage life. In this context, fruit morphological and nutritional attributes of five mini watermelon genotypes namely BARI watermelon 1 (W1), BARI watermelon 2 (W2), L-32468 (W3), L-32236 (W4) and L-32394 (W5) were evaluated to appraise promising genotypes with better fruit quality. The evaluated genotypes expressed different levels of diversity for fruit physical qualitative traits including differences in shape, rind and flesh color and texture. The study also revealed significant variability among the genotypes regarding all observed fruit morphological and nutritional aspects as well as bioactive compounds. Among the studied genotypes, W1 stood out with the highest TSS as well as rind vitamin C and total phenolic content accompanied by higher fruit weight and thick rind. On the other hand, W3 genotype was featured with higher amount of \b{eta} carotene, total phenolic and flavonoid content in its flesh along with rind enriched with \b{eta} carotene and minerals. However, comparatively higher amount of sugar and total flavonoid content was recorded in the rind of W5 genotype. Therefore, W1 and W3 could be exploited for table purpose and using in breeding program to develop mini watermelon cultivars with more attractive fruits in terms of quality acceptance and nutritional value in Bangladesh. Furthermore, rind of BARI watermelon 1 and L-32394 could be considered as the potential cheap source of bioactive compounds to be used for dietary and industrial purpose which would decrease the solid waste in the environment.
