Title: Multiscale cortical morphometry reveals pronounced regional and scale-dependent variations across the lifespan
Authors: Karoline Leiberg, Timo Blattner, Bethany Little, Victor B. B. Mello, Fernanda H. P. de Moraes, Christian Rummel, Peter N. Taylor, Bruno Mota, Yujiang Wang
ID: 2311.13501
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.13501

Abstract:
Motivation: Characterising the changes in cortical morphology across the lifespan is fundamental for a range of research and clinical applications. Most studies to date have found a monotonic decrease in commonly used morphometrics, such as cortical thickness and volume, across the entire brain with increasing age. Any regional variations reported are subtle changes in the rate of decrease. However, these descriptions of morphological changes have been limited to a single length scale. Here, we delineate the morphological changes associated with the healthy lifespan in multiscale morphometrics.
  Methods: We applied multiscale morphometric analysis to structural MRI from subjects aged 6-88 years from NKI (n=833) and CamCAN (n=641). These multiscale morphometrics were obtained at both the cortical hemisphere and lobe level.
  Results: On the level of whole cortical hemispheres, lifespan trajectories show diverging and even opposing trends at different spatial scales, in contrast to the monotonic decreases of volume and thickness described so far. Importantly, larger scales displayed most dramatic changes across the lifespan (up to 60%). More pronounced lobal differences in lifespan trajectories also became apparent in scales over 0.7mm. In a proof-of-principle application in brain age prediction, we also demonstrate added information contributed by multiscale morphometrics.
  Conclusion: Our study provides a comprehensive multiscale description of lifespan effects on cortical morphology in an age range from 6-88~years. In future, this can form the foundations for a normative model to compare individuals or cohorts, hence identifying multiscale morphological abnormalities. Our results reveal the complementary information contained in different spatial scales, suggesting that morphometrics should not be considered on a single scale, but as functions of length scale.
