Title: Multi-centre normative brain mapping of intracranial EEG lifespan patterns in the human brain
Authors: Heather Woodhouse, Gerard Hall, Callum Simpson, Csaba Kozma, Frances Turner, Gabrielle M. Schroeder, Beate Diehl, John S. Duncan, Jiajie Mo, Kai Zhang, Aswin Chari, Martin Tisdall, Friederike Moeller, Chris Petkov, Matthew A. Howard, George M. Ibrahim, Elizabeth Donner, Nebras M. Warsi, Raheel Ahmed, Peter N. Taylor, Yujiang Wang
ID: 2404.17952
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.17952

Abstract:
Background: Understanding healthy human brain function is crucial to identify and map pathological tissue within it. Whilst previous studies have mapped intracranial EEG (icEEG) from non-epileptogenic brain regions, these maps do not consider the effects of age and sex. Further, most existing work on icEEG has often suffered from a small sample size due to the modality's invasive nature. Here, we substantially increase the subject sample size compared to existing literature, to create a multi-centre, normative map of brain activity which additionally considers the effects of age, sex and recording hospital.
  Methods: Using interictal icEEG recordings from n = 502 subjects originating from 15 centres, we constructed a normative map of non-pathological brain activity by regressing age and sex on relative band power in five frequency bands, whilst accounting for the hospital effect.
  Results: Recording hospital significantly impacted normative icEEG maps in all frequency bands, and age was a more influential predictor of band power than sex. The age effect varied by frequency band, but no spatial patterns were observed at the region-specific level. Certainty about regression coefficients was also frequency band specific and moderately impacted by sample size.
  Conclusion: The concept of a normative map is well-established in neuroscience research and particularly relevant to the icEEG modality, which does not allow healthy control baselines. Our key results regarding the hospital site and age effect guide future work utilising normative maps in icEEG.
