Title: Metabolic energy expenditure for time-varying isometric forces
Authors: Sriram Sekaripuram Muralidhar, Kristen Heitman, Samuel C. Walcott, Manoj Srinivasan
ID: 2501.00723
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.00723

Abstract:
Muscles consume metabolic energy (ATP) to produce force. A mathematical model for energy expenditure can be useful in estimating real-time costs of movements or to predict energy optimal movements. Metabolic cost models developed so far have predominantly aimed at dynamic movement tasks, where mechanical work dominates. Further, while it is known that both force magnitude and rate of change of force (force rate) affect metabolic cost, it is not known how these terms interact, or if the force rate dependence can be a consequence of the force dependence. Here, we performed extensive human subject experiments, involving each subject over 5 hours of metabolic trials, which systematically changed the mean forces and forces rates so as to characterize a holistic relation for metabolic cost based on both force and force rate -- or analogously, torque and torque rate. Our experiments involved humans producing symmetric or asymmetric sinusoidal forces with different means, amplitudes, frequencies, and rise and fall periods. We showed that the metabolic cost can be well-approximated by a sum of power law functions of torque and torque rate. We found that the metabolic cost scales non-linearly with joint torque (with exponent = 1.36) and non-linearly with torque rate (with exponent = 2.5). Surprisingly, the data suggested that the cost was roughly four times higher for decreasing the torque than increasing, mirroring the analogous ratio between the cost of positive and negative work. Using these metabolic cost relations, we show that if the metabolic cost scales with particular exponents with muscle force and force rates, the same exponents will be observed in multi-joint tasks with multiple muscles. Our new metabolic cost model involving both force and force rate will potentially allow better predictions of energy optimal movements and thus inform wearable robot design and analysis.
