Title: Spatial Analysis of Neuromuscular Junctions Activation in Three-Dimensional Histology-based Muscle Reconstructions
Authors: Alessandro Ascani Orsini, Manan Bhatt, Pierce L. Perkins, Siyu Wang, Kiara N. Quinn, Kenzi Griffith, Fausto Kang, Nitish V. Thakor
ID: 2502.18646
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.18646

Abstract:
Histology has long been a foundational technique for studying anatomical structures through tissue slicing. Advances in computational methods now enable three dimensional (3D) reconstruction of organs from histology images, enhancing the analysis of structural and functional features. Here, we present a novel multimodal computational method to reconstruct rodent muscles in 3D using classical image processing and data analysis techniques, analyze their structural features and correlate them to previously recorded electrophysiological data. The algorithm analyzes spatial distribution patterns of features identified through histological staining, normalizing them across multiple samples. Further, the algorithm successfully correlates spatial patterns with high density epimysial ElectroMyoGraphy (hdEMG) recordings, providing a multimodal perspective on neuromuscular dynamics, linking spatial and electrophysiological information. The code was validated by looking at the distribution of NeuroMuscular Junctions (NMJs) in naive soleus muscles and compared the distributions and patterns observed with ones observed in previous literature. Our results showed consistency with the expected results, validating our method for features and pattern recognition. The multimodal aspect was shown in a naive soleus muscle, where a strong correlation was found between motor unit locations derived via hdEMG, and NMJ locations obtained from histology, highlighting their spatial relationship. This multimodal analysis tool integrates 3D structural data with electrophysiological activity, opening new avenues in muscle diagnostics, regenerative medicine, and personalized therapies where spatial insights could one day predict electrophysiological behavior or vice versa.
