Title: Functional classification of metabolic networks
Authors: Jorge Reyes, Jörn Dunkel
ID: 2503.14437
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14437

Abstract:
Chemical reaction networks underpin biological and physical phenomena across scales, from microbial interactions to planetary atmosphere dynamics. Bacterial communities exhibit complex competitive interactions for resources, human organs and tissues demonstrate specialized biochemical functions, and planetary atmospheres can display diverse organic and inorganic chemical processes. Despite their complexities, comparing these networks methodically remains a challenge due to the vast underlying degrees of freedom. In biological systems, comparative genomics has been pivotal in tracing evolutionary trajectories and classifying organisms via DNA sequences. However, purely genomic classifications often fail to capture functional roles within ecological systems. Metabolic changes driven by nutrient availability highlight the need for classification schemes that integrate metabolic information. Here we introduce and apply a computational framework for a classification scheme of organisms that compares matrix representations of chemical reaction networks using the Grassmann distance, corresponding to measuring distances between the nullspaces of stoichiometric matrices. Applying this framework to human gut microbiome data confirms that metabolic distances are distinct from phylogenetic distances, underscoring the limitations of genetic information in metabolic classification. Importantly, our analysis of metabolic distances reveals functional groups of organisms enriched or depleted in specific metabolic processes and shows robustness to metabolically silent genetic perturbations. The generalizability of metabolic Grassmann distances is illustrated by application to chemical reaction networks in human tissue and planetary atmospheres, highlighting its potential for advancing functional comparisons across diverse chemical reaction systems.
