Title: External light schedules can induce nighttime sleep disruptions in a Homeostat-Circadian-Light Model for sleep in young children
Authors: Tianyong Yao, Victoria Booth
ID: 2507.19772
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.19772

Abstract:
Sleep disturbances, particularly nighttime waking, are highly prevalent in young children and can significantly disrupt not only the child's well-being but also family functioning. Behavioral and environmental strategies, including the regulation of light exposure, are typically recommended treatments for nighttime waking. Using the Homeostatic-Circadian-Light (HCL) mathematical model for sleep timing based on the interaction of the circadian rhythm, the homeostatic sleep drive and external light, we analyze how external light schedules can influence the occurrence of nighttime waking in young children. We fit the model to data for sleep homeostasis and sleep behavior in 2 - 3.5 year olds and identified subsets of parameter ranges that fit the data but indicated a susceptibility to nighttime waking. This suggests that as children develop they may exhibit more or less propensity to awaken during the night. Notably, parameter sets exhibiting earlier sleep timing were more susceptible to nighttime waking. For a model parameter set susceptible to, but not exhibiting, nighttime waking, we analyze how external light schedules affect sleep patterns. We find that low daytime light levels can induce nighttime sleep disruptions and extended bright-light exposure also promotes nighttime waking. Further results suggest that consistent daily routines are essential; irregular schedules, particularly during weekends, markedly worsen the consolidation of nighttime sleep. Specifically, weekend delays in morning lights-on and evening lights-off times result in nighttime sleep disruptions and can influence sleep timing during the week. These results highlight how external light, daily rhythms, and parenting routines interact to shape childrens' sleep health, providing a useful framework for improving sleep management practices.
