Title: Processes of Asian American identity development : a study of Japanese American women's perceptions of their struggle to achieve positive identities as Americans of Asian ancestry.
Authors: Jean Kim
ID: openalex.W150269449
URL: https://scholarworks.umass.edu/dissertations_1/3685

Purpose. The purpose of this study was to examine the process by which Asian
Americans resolve their identity conflict around being Americans of Asian
ancestry, living in a predominantly White society. The general goal was to find
out how these identity conflicts around one's racial membership are resolved,
and what the relationship is between identity conflict resolution and the
development of Asian American identity. Since there were no known studies on the
process of Asian American identity development (AAID), this study was considered
to be an exploratory research in this area. Therefore, instead of specific
hypothesis testing, the present study sought answers to a set of general
research questions: What is the process by which Asian American identity
conflicts are resolved and what are its salient aspects? What does the identity
conflict resolution lead to? What factors assist the individuals to resolve
their identity conflict? What is the nature of critical incidences that
precipitate change in perceptions of being Asian American? What is the
relationship between the process of Asian American identity development and
Erikson's theory of ego identity development? What meanings do subjects
attribute to their Asian American identity? Methodology. As an exploratory study
with the desired goal of generating a theory on the process of Asian American
identity development, a qualitative research method was used. The study
utilized, as its methodological framework, the work of Glaser and Strauss (1968)
on The Discovery of Grounded Theory. Specifically, the study utilized an
unstructured, focused, individual interview method to gather the data. Ten
Sansei (third-generation Japanese American) women made up the sample. This
sample was further delineated into two groups: those who spent their formative
years in predominantly White (PW) ethnic neighborhoods and those who spent the
same period in predominantly non-white (PNW) ethnic neighborhoods. The criterion
used for making this separation was based on self-report. The purpose of
creating this grouping was to further examine the influence of subjects' social
environment on the process of AAID. Comparative analysis was made on the
collected data. The results of this analysis was also compared with stages 4 and
5 of Erikson's life cycle of identity (1963, 1968) and Black identity
development theories of Hall and Cross (1970) and Jackson (1976). Results and
Conclusion. Analysis of the data indicated that the process of Asian American
identity development involves five conceptually distinct stages that are
sequential and progressive. These stages are: Ethnic awareness, White
identification, Awakening to social political consciousness, Redirection to
Asian American consciousness, and Incorporation. In all cases, the resolution of
identity conflict around one's racial membership led to the development of a
positive racial identity as Asian Americans. In general, subjects' interaction
with their social environment played a major role in affecting the quality of
the process of AAID while the categories of experiences remained the same. This
effect was most evident in the between-group differences of the PNW and PW
neighborhood samples. Several factors that facilitated subjects' movement from
one stage to another were identified. These are: information (both ethnic and
political), support system (individuals and groups), and interaction with social
environment (general social political consciousness, social political movements
involving other minorities, Asian American movement). Lastly, it is clear that
much more research is needed in this general area of AAID. True to its
exploratory nature, the results of the present study raised many more questions
than it answered.
