Title: Exploring online experiences, cyberbullying and wellbeing for young people looked after in Wales: An analysis of the school health research network 2017/18 survey
Authors: Louisa M. Roberts, Sophie Wood, Cindy Corliss, Rebecca Anthony
ID: openalex.W4387222354
URL: https://doi.org/10.1177/25161032231204967

For young people the online world affords creative, entertainment and
socialisation opportunities but also poses risks including cyberbullying,
grooming and harmful content. Little is known about online experiences of care-
experienced young people, a vulnerable group who may benefit from online
experiences but may be at increased risk online. This cross-sectional study used
data from 11- to 16-year-olds in Wales from the School Health Research Network
(SHRN) Student Health and Wellbeing Survey 2017/18 ( n = 103,971).
Cyberbullying, face-to-face bullying and other online experiences were analysed.
The prevalence of these experiences and associated mean wellbeing scores were
compared for young people in care ( n = 1,921) and not in care ( n = 83,551),
controlling for socio-demographic variables gender, ethnicity and year group.
Higher numbers of young people in care were involved in cyberbullying, bullying,
sharing explicit images, problematic social media use and regular contact with
online only friends. These online experiences were associated with lower mean
wellbeing scores. Lower numbers of young people in care had access to
smartphones and social networking sites from age 12, and lower numbers were
regularly in online contact with close friends and a wider peer group. These
online experiences were associated with higher mean wellbeing scores. Young
people in care appear to be less involved with online experiences that
positively impact wellbeing and more involved in online experiences that
negatively impact wellbeing. Promoting positive online experiences and education
around problematic social media use may be particularly valuable in helping
young people living in care develop healthy, safe and positive online lives.
