Title: The use of films in the teaching of English as a foreign language: a systematic literature review
Authors: Estefanía Sánchez Auñón, Pedro Antonio Férez Mora, Fuensanta Monroy Hernández
ID: openalex.W4362578038
URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/s40862-022-00183-0

Abstract Background Especially over the last decades, the use of cinema in the
English as a foreign language (EFL) class has been gaining momentum. Although
this interest has resulted in a complex body of research, no review to date had
aimed to systematically map out (i) the pedagogical guidelines available for
English teachers to implement films in class; (ii) the perceptions of EFL
teachers and learners on the educational use of films; and (iii) the impact of
cinema-based EFL on students’ learning, pertinent aspects as they contribute to
deactivate instructors’ reported reluctance to use films as a proper teaching
material. Thus, a systematic literature review has been conducted along the
three previously-mentioned research questions with the aim of highlighting in a
comprehensive manner the robust pedagogical value of cinema in EFL contexts.
Methods A systematic search was carried out in Web of Science, ERIC, MLA
International Bibliography, Education Database, and Scopus, which were last
consulted on 2 December, 2022. Inclusion and exclusion criteria were applied,
which covered journal papers written in English, peer-reviewed, published in
open-access, and focusing on the exploitation of films for the teaching of
English as a foreign language. Following the search and selection stages, a
coding scheme was established, and the authors conducted a thematically based
qualitative analysis to answer the research questions. Reliability was tested to
check the agreement rate among the researchers. Findings Of the 416 sources
found, 44 were eligible. Twenty-five percent of the selected references consist
of theoretical or practical methodological orientations for the implementation
of films in the EFL class, 16% of the sources explore EFL teachers’ and
students’ perceptions on the educational use of films, and the remaining 59% of
the references tap into the impact of cinema-based EFL on students’ learning.
The results revealed that more informed guidelines on the exploitation of this
resource are needed, that both instructors and teachers have a great attitude
towards this method, and that films provide EFL learners with linguistic,
intercultural, and motivational benefits. Interpretation On a general note,
scholars have adopted a narrow focus when exploring cinema-based English
teaching since they only address some of its benefits and they have mostly
concentrated on the University educational context. Specific research gaps are
highlighted in relation to each research question, and avenues for further
research are proposed. Finally, pedagogical implications for the educational use
of cinema in the English class are provided.
