Title: Role of Youth in Education and its Impact on Development in District Doda, Jammu and Kashmir
Authors: Gufran Hussain Batt
ID: openalex.W4387060903
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.31305/rrijm.2023.v08.n09.007

The mountainous region of India has been at the mercy of political turmoil for
years, and on-going conflicts have limited access to quality learning
environments. Without proper access to education and resources, many of Doda
District's youth are unable to reach their fullest potential or even participate
in basic levels of development. In this , we're exploring the impact of
education on youth and development in Doda District, Jammu and Kashmir. We're
going to uncover how lack of education has impacted the region's economic and
social growth while examining current initiatives that are creating change. The
on the title focuses on how to improve the development and participation of
youth in the field of education. There are so many challenges faced by the
people in the area in the shape of terrorism that stops the youth’s
participation in the system of education and development that is why we need to
protect both the development and education so we can get the peace, prosperity,
brotherhood, harmony, tolerance and defence. It is the education through which
we gain peace that leads to development and awareness of the positivity. The
government has also introduced the New Education Policy Model which is a
curriculum-based educational programmed for the betterment of children. This
programmed focuses on developing the cognitive, physical and social skills of
children. The region has also developed a Child Friendly School (CFS) concept,
which seeks to provide quality education to children from lower-income families.
CFSs are supported by the government and have teachers who are specially trained
in early childhood education. Jammu and Kashmir has taken significant steps to
ensure that all children have access to quality education. The initiatives
mentioned above have helped the state to become one of the leading providers of
ECE in India.
