Title: Library of children’s reading conceptual modeling by teachers
Authors: Galina M. Pervova
ID: openalex.W4383425074
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.20310/1810-0201-2023-28-3-538-547

Relevance. The place of children’s reading in the spatially developing
environment of a preschool educational institution as functionally significant
for the child’s intellectual development is reflected. The problem of book
fund’s lack a in a kindergarten, created according to science’s rules, is posed.
The purpose of the research is to elaborate a concept for the formation of a
library of children’s books in a preschool educational institution. Materials
and methods. The library formation theoretical foundations for children in a
preschool educational institution are revealed. Historical-literary, book-study
and culturological principles of selection and grouping of children’s books and
works for younger, middle and older age groups of young listeners are
considered. The books of the picture, game, activity type and the classic type
of book publication for children are characterized. Method algorithms of viewing
a children’s book, organizing listening, playing, and creative tasks are
proposed. Result and Discussion. The psychological, pedagogical and literary
rules of children’s reading range formation are formulated: the rule of age
restrictions, age correspondences and age perspective, the rule of meaningful
peace, thematic richness and genre diversity. The methods aspects of the child’s
interaction with the book and magazine are reflected. Appeal to children’s
literature motives dynamics of preschoolers from one to two years before the
beginning of school education is revealed. The results of the author’s
scientific and pedagogical statements about a high-quality library of children’s
reading in a preschool educational institution are concluded. Conclusion. The
concept of an integrated scientific approach to the libraries formation in
kindergartens is declared and the experience of this activity, repeatedly tested
by us, is reflected. As a visual generalization, a drawing of the conceptual
model is given. This model can be used to develop the reading range of younger
schoolchildren.
