Title: CORRUPTION PREVENTION IN UKRAINE THROUGH THE PRISM OF ELITE MENTALITY
Authors: Олена Бусол, Bogdan Romanyk
ID: openalex.W4391985214
URL: https://doi.org/10.30525/2256-0742/2023-9-5-64-72

The article considers the problem of corruption prevention from the perspective
of the elite mentality and proves the necessity of cultivating a national anti-
corruption culture in Ukraine. The purpose of the article is to consider the
problem of corruption prevention from the perspective of the elite psyche and to
prove the necessity of cultivating a national anti-corruption culture in
Ukraine. Methodology. The synergetic method of scientific cognition allowed to
study society and its anti-corruption institutions as a system characterised by
transparency, diffusion, irregular connections, functional instability, whose
development is non-linear under the influence of a wide range of often random
factors, especially in its critical and unstable states. The phenomenological
method is used to clarify the nature and mechanism of individual criminal
behaviour of a corrupt official, the influence of factors of the fight against
corruption crimes on its overall level and the level of effectiveness of the
fight against corruption in individual states. The comparative method makes it
possible to identify common and special phenomena in different socio-cultural
systems through comparison. In the process of writing this article, the authors
used philosophical, psychological, sociological and other literature related to
the topic of this study, along with scientific works on criminology. Results.
The article proves that a huge anti-corruption machine consisting of anti-
corruption and repressive bodies with different status, functions and tasks in
Ukraine is not an effective tool for fighting corruption. Practical
implications. Today, repressive measures in the fight against corruption are
effective only when combined with preventive measures. Value/originality.
According to the theory proposed by the authors, the mission of social
cultivation of the nation should be carried out by its elite. In the long run,
the application of preventive measures will lead to the education of a virtuous
generation of citizens. Virtuous citizens will form an elite that will cherish
anti-corruption values. Conclusion. The authors of the article conclude that
among all the ways to respond to such a multifactorial phenomenon as corruption,
preventive steps are the most effective and inexpensive for the state. The
results of the study will be useful for the governments of other countries that
suffer from corruption.
