Title: Children’s Safety on YouTube: A Systematic Review
Authors: Saeed Ibrahim Alqahtani, Wael M. S. Yafooz, Abdullah Alsaeedi, Liyakathunisa Syed, Reyadh Alluhaibi
ID: openalex.W4353064258
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/app13064044

Background: With digital transformation and growing social media usage, kids
spend considerable time on the web, especially watching videos on YouTube.
YouTube is a source of education and entertainment media that has a significant
impact on the skill improvement, knowledge, and attitudes of children.
Simultaneously, harmful and inappropriate video content has a negative impact.
Recently, researchers have given much attention to these issues, which are
considered important for individuals and society. The proposed methods and
approaches are to limit or prevent such threats that may negatively influence
kids. These can be categorized into five main directions. They are video rating,
parental control applications, analysis meta-data of videos, video or audio
content, and analysis of user accounts. Objective: The purpose of this study is
to conduct a systematic review of the existing methods, techniques, tools, and
approaches that are used to protect kids and prevent them from accessing
inappropriate content on YouTube videos. Methods: This study conducts a
systematic review of research papers that were published between January 2016
and December 2022 in international journals and international conferences,
especially in IEEE Xplore Digital Library, ACM Digital Library, Web of Science,
Google Scholar, Springer database, and ScienceDirect database. Results: The
total number of collected articles was 435. The selection and filtration process
reduced this to 72 research articles that were appropriate and related to the
objective. In addition, the outcome answers three main identified research
questions. Significance: This can be beneficial to data mining, cybersecurity
researchers, and peoples’ concerns about children’s cybersecurity and safety.
