Title: Examining the effect of learning environment on student behaviour through comparison of face-to-face and online design studio
Authors: ceren doğan DERVİŞOĞLU
ID: openalex.W4381803178
URL: http://doi.org/10.14744/megaron.2023.70120

Covid-19 pandemic has affected the field of education, and transition to the
distance learning has led to changes in the learning environment and pedagogical
transformations. In this process, design studios, which are the basis of
architectural education, were also maintained on online platforms. The aim of
this study is to investigate the effect of the rapid learning environment change
in the architectural design studio due to the Covid-19 pandemic on student
behaviour. Examining students' holistic perspectives and behaviours based on
their experience in faceto-face design studios and online design studios, this
research attempts to reveal the potential and challenges of face-to-face and
online studios. In this study, students' behavioural changes regarding face-to-
face studio and online studio were measured using the survey method, and these
two learning environments were interpreted over six themes (peer learning,
socially mediated learning, self-efficacy, self-regulation, motivation, and
communication with the instructor) by using the survey results, the course
structure and the theoretical framework. The findings reveal that change in the
learning environment affects student behaviour and that face-to-face design
studios and online design studios have different potentials and limitations. In
addition, the course structure of the face-to-face studio and online studio, the
tools and methods used in learning, the way of communication and collaboration
vary depending on the structure of the learning environment. This study reveals
that the face-to-face design studio is a learning environment where the social
structure of the studio is developed, peer learning is supported, and methods
such as physical model and hand-sketching are used as well as digital tools
during communication with the instructor. It shows that the most important
potentials of the online studio are that it offers a flexible learning
environment, does not have time and place restrictions, allows for cross-
cultural and inter-institutional collaboration, and supports self-study. As a
result, the research shows that online studio experiences gained during the
pandemic period can offer the opportunity to create blended learning
environments by adding online features to the traditional face-to-face studio.
