Title: Consumers’ Intention toward Mitigation of Plate Waste Behaviour in Restaurants – Development of Conceptual Model
Authors: Meghana Salins, P. S. Aithal
ID: openalex.W4385432060
URL: https://doi.org/10.47992/ijmts.2581.6012.0279

Purpose: There have been growing concerns over food security and the problems of
food waste on the environment, including resource depletion and greenhouse gas
emissions for many years. Although food waste can happen at any point in the
food supply chain, the factors that influence consumer intention has been
identified as the main contributors to food waste generation. The main purpose
of the research is to develop a conceptual model for the study and to
investigate the factors that influence consumers' intentions toward reducing
food waste behaviour in restaurants based on recognized consumer behaviour
theories and an extensive literature review. Design: This research work is based
on secondary sources which are collected from academic journals, newspapers,
case studies, and internet searches. Postulates and the influencing variables to
consumers' intention to mitigate food waste in restaurants are developed using
the focus group interaction. Findings: The study explores the postulates
affecting consumers' intention to reduce food waste in restaurants by
extensively reviewing empirical theories. Through the development of a
conceptual model evaluation, the factors associated with the study were
awareness, food quality, environmental concern, attitude, and subjective norms
system, which impact consumers' behavioural intention toward food waste
mitigation in restaurants. Originality: As the conceptual model was being
developed, the research study identifies several postulates with the assistance
of several models and theories related to consumer behavioural intention and
discusses several factors that influence consumer intention in mitigating food
waste in restaurants. Paper Type: Review of literature for the development of
the conceptual framework.
