Title: A Chance at the Arts: Assessment of NYC Department of Education’s ArtsCount as a Violation of Title VI Implementing Regulation
Authors: Siena Stanislaus
ID: openalex.W4376312684
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.52214/jla.v46i3.11240

The City of New York has historically struggled with equitable funding in its
public education system. As a result, funding for arts education in New York
City public schools has steadily declined. This trend further perpetuates a
widespread cultural attitude that undervalues the academic benefits of arts
education for students. This lack of support for the arts has particularly
impacted schools located in low-income neighborhoods which suffer from low
engagement with—and participation in—arts programs and arts instruction. Rocco
Landesman, Former Chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, wrote in his
study on arts and achievement for at-risk youth that “the only outcomes we
should need to measure for a music class is whether the child had the chance to
create, enjoy, and understand music.” The New York City Department of Education
has attempted to offer all students the chance to participate in arts education
through various policy initiatives. In particular, New York City’s Blueprint for
the Arts curriculum initiative and its supplemental accountability program,
ArtsCount, were implemented to enhance students’ access to arts instruction. The
decade following their implementation, however, revealed obvious shortcomings
and failures. Moreover, the lack of reform of these initiatives perpetuates the
culture of unequal access that is so commonly associated with arts
education.&#x0D; Title VI of the 1964 Civil Rights Act states: “[n]o person in
the United States shall, on the ground of race, color, or national origin, be
excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to
discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal financial
assistance.” Particularly, Title VI imposes regulations for the implementation
of federal funds. Such regulations require that recipients may not “utilize
criteria or methods of administration which have the effect of subjecting
individuals to discrimination because of their race, color, or national origin,
or have the effect of defeating or substantially impairing accomplishment of the
objectives of the program as respect individuals of a particular race, color, or
national origin.”&#x0D; In 2014, the NYC Comptroller released a report
describing the failures of ArtsCount, focusing in part on inequities in the
distribution of arts instruction across New York City school districts. The
results demonstrate a positive correlation between the presence of art
instructors, art classrooms, and art programs to socioeconomic status and racial
makeup of particular districts. These results are especially problematic as the
very purpose of these initiatives is to enhance access to arts education for New
York City students. This Note will explore several possible explanations for
these failures, including societal and policy-based influences on school leaders
in low-income neighborhoods, and how those influences were exacerbated by
inefficient systems of reporting such as New York City’s ArtsCount.&#x0D; Prior
to the implementation of BluePrint for the Arts and ArtsCount, New York City
provided arts funding through Project ARTS, a grant program that provided
schools with dedicated arts funding. This program required that Project ARTS
funding was spent in areas related directly to the arts. Transitioning to
Blueprint for the Arts and ArtsCount allows the New York City Department of
Education to take a passive approach to implementing arts education funding.
With ArtsCount, funding that would have previously been dedicated to the arts is
now provided to school leaders through general school budgets using ArtsCount as
a method to ensure accountability for investing in arts programs. However, the
inadequacy of ArtsCount has led to many students in areas of lower socioeconomic
status—primarily students of color—having to go without the necessary arts
education curriculum as put forth by BluePrint for the Arts, the very curriculum
that ArtsCount was meant to ensure.&#x0D; The inadequacy of this accountability
program poses the question of possible Title VI violations. The several years
following the Comptroller report have seen little change, despite
recommendations for how to mitigate such discriminatory effects. In order to
prove a violation of Title VI’s implementing regulations, proof of
discriminatory effect will suffice to establish liability and proof of
discriminatory intent is not needed. While it could be argued that such a
funding structure is necessary and justified, offering less discriminatory
alternatives would demonstrate that this structure is still indeed a Title VI
violation. This Note explores potential alternatives to the current
accountability framework, including reframing how arts education should and may
be spent, and rethinking the way that data regarding arts education instruction
is collected.&#x0D; Overall, the goal of this Note is to assess the current
status of arts education in New York City Public Schools and how its current
funding structure and accountability program impacts the presence of arts
education across New York City school districts. This assessment will focus
primarily on the New York City public school system, as New York City is a
cultural hub of the world with communities of different races, ethnicities, and
many socioeconomic backgrounds. Part I of this Note provides background
information on Title VI of the Civil Rights Act, societal conceptions on the
value of arts education, the history of arts education funding in New York City,
and the implementation of ArtsCount. Part II of this Note assesses New York
City’s current accountability framework in context of Title VI’s implementing
regulation, considering the history of race disparities within arts education at
the national and local levels. Part III of this Note proposes an alternative
which may mitigate such discriminatory implications and increase access to arts
education among New York City Public School students. This solution involves a
more detailed system of reporting, a mid-level compromise for discretion offered
to school leaders over arts funding, and education initiatives offering
incentives to increase arts integration in daily common core subject areas.
Essentially, this Note articulates the need for reform of the current framework
meant to create equal access to arts education for New York City public school
students. While focusing on the prevalent racial and socioeconomic disparities
that continue under this regime, this Note utilizes the protection offered by
Title VI of the 1964 Civil Rights Act to validate the right to reformation.
