Title: Nutrition and food security in Nepal: a narrative review of policies
Authors: Nabin Adhikari, Mukesh Adhikari, Namuna Shrestha, Priza Pradhananga, Bikram Poudel
ID: openalex.W4328050100
URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/nutrit/nuad025

In the past few decades, the Nepali government has endorsed several nutritional
policies, strategies, and guidelines. Given the lack of a comprehensive review
of such policy documents, this review aims to describe the nutrition and food
security policies and understand the existing policy gaps in Nepal. Findings
from this study can be used to develop policies and programs to address Nepal's
current and future nutritional needs. Policies relevant to nutrition and food
security were identified by searching government websites and directly
approaching relevant government ministries. Thematic analysis was conducted
using framework methods under 8 predetermined themes: nutrition intervention,
food security, food system, capacity building of human resources, nutrition
education, nutrition governance, research, and monitoring and evaluation. The
contents of each document reviewed were manually extracted in a spreadsheet
stratified by the themes, and the findings were summarized for the respective
themes. A total of 30 policy documents were reviewed. Most policies have focused
on undernutrition; only a few have addressed overnutrition and diet-related
noncommunicable diseases. Food security through a sustainable food system has
been considered a key policy area in Nepal. Other areas in the food and
nutrition policy landscape are capacity building for human resources, behavior
change practices, nutrition governance, monitoring, and evaluation. Policy gaps
have been identified in the quality and sustainability of nutrition programs;
access to health care services; competent human resources for nutrition;
intersectoral coordination and commitment; and support for monitoring,
evaluation, and research activities. Most policies have tried to address a wide
range of components of food and nutrition security; however, strategies focused
on overnutrition and diet-related noncommunicable diseases are lacking. Several
gaps are identified in this policy review; the findings can guide the
policymakers to address these gaps via further policy development.
