Title: Universal interpretations of vocal music
Authors: Lidya Yurdum, Manvir Singh, Luke Glowacki, Thomas Vardy, Quentin D. Atkinson
ID: openalex.W4386494573
URL: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2218593120

Despite the variability of music across cultures, some types of human songs
share acoustic characteristics. For example, dance songs tend to be loud and
rhythmic, and lullabies tend to be quiet and melodious. Human perceptual
sensitivity to the behavioral contexts of songs, based on these musical
features, suggests that basic properties of music are mutually intelligible,
independent of linguistic or cultural content. Whether these effects reflect
universal interpretations of vocal music, however, is unclear because prior
studies focus almost exclusively on English-speaking participants, a group that
is not representative of humans. Here, we report shared intuitions concerning
the behavioral contexts of unfamiliar songs produced in unfamiliar languages, in
participants living in Internet-connected industrialized societies (n = 5,516
native speakers of 28 languages) or smaller-scale societies with limited access
to global media (n = 116 native speakers of three non-English languages).
Participants listened to songs randomly selected from a representative sample of
human vocal music, originally used in four behavioral contexts, and rated the
degree to which they believed the song was used for each context. Listeners in
both industrialized and smaller-scale societies inferred the contexts of dance
songs, lullabies, and healing songs, but not love songs. Within and across
cohorts, inferences were mutually consistent. Further, increased linguistic or
geographical proximity between listeners and singers only minimally increased
the accuracy of the inferences. These results demonstrate that the behavioral
contexts of three common forms of music are mutually intelligible cross-
culturally and imply that musical diversity, shaped by cultural evolution, is
nonetheless grounded in some universal perceptual phenomena.
