Title: All Shades of Green: The Anatomy of the Fridays for Future Movement in Italy
Authors: Viktoriia Tomnyuk, Giuseppe Varavallo, Tania Parisi, Filippo Barbera
ID: openalex.W4386894599
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/su151813917

The Fridays for Future (FFF) movement has emerged as a critical force in
environmental activism in response to pressing climate challenges. Despite its
global prominence, few studies have delved deeply into the internal lines of
thought within FFF communities. Our research fills this gap by exploring the
diverse perspectives within the Italian FFF community and how these viewpoints
influence the movement’s civic and political dedication to environmental
sustainability. We are specifically interested in the shades of green, namely
the internal variations of attitudes and beliefs of the FFF participants. We
conducted empirical research with over 300 climate activists from the FFF
movement in Italy, collecting data from March to October 2022 using a Web-based
respondent-driven sampling technique (webRDS). The questionnaire, comprising 27
questions, covers topics such as political values, institutional trust,
technological attitudes, climate knowledge, and personal lifestyles. We chose
Multiple Correspondence Analysis (MCA) for our analysis due to its valuable
mathematical properties, capability for producing insightful visual
representations, and efficient computational features. The analysis reveals four
distinct groups within the Italian FFF community based on their attitudes and
actions related to environmental sustainability. These groups include Activist
Equalizer, Disillusioned Technophobes, Institution Trustee, and Laissez-faire
Solitaries, challenging the prevailing notion that FFF activists solely fit the
profile of Activist Equalizers often depicted in media and public discourse.
Findings offer a novel picture of the FFF movement in Italy and contribute to a
better understanding of how the internal diversity of FFF impacts the efficacy
and future trajectory of environmental activism. This research offers new
insight into the political role of FFF and its potential influence on climate-
related political actions.
