Title: Subverting the selective tradition? A self-exploration of text selection in pre-service teacher education
Authors: Joanne Quick
ID: openalex.W4386736244
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s44020-023-00047-1

Abstract Children’s literature can be both a reflective mirror to readers’ lives
and a window to new worlds, making teachers’ selection of texts for students an
important professional activity. Researchers have consistently found that
teachers’ choices of literature contain limited representations of ethnicities,
cultures, and disabilities, and reinforce gender stereotypes. Teacher educators,
when working with pre-service teachers in university settings, utilize
children’s literature for literary, critical, and cultural pedagogical purposes.
However, teacher educators rarely interrogate their text selections to explore
patterns of representation, identity, and power. This paper describes and
discusses a self-study into five children’s picture books selected for modeling
aspects of early literacy teaching in a pre-service teacher education unit.
Critical content analysis was used to explore representation, identity, and
power in the texts. The analysis showed some connections with trends found in
research into early years and school teachers’ selective traditions in the use
of an older text and two texts without human characters. Other findings
differed; agentive female characters, together with some variation of social,
cultural, and ethnic groups and lives, were depicted in the three texts with
human characters, likely because of the author’s own bias towards expanding
representation in texts. This article reports on an example of one teacher
educator’s selective literary tradition and shows how the texts used in
education settings represent windows to specific worlds rather than standing in
for “diversity.” It makes suggestions for other educators interested in
interrogating their text selections and invites dialog with other educators
about representation, identity, and power in the texts they teach with.
