Title: Student support and motivation in online learning: evidence from pilot online course implementation
Authors: Rasa Tamulienė, Alina Liepinaitienė, Edvinas Ignatavičius
ID: openalex.W4386488011
URL: https://doi.org/10.59476/mtt.v1i19.594

Teaching and learning in a virtual environment bring many changes in the
implementation of study content. During online learning, the number of hours of
contact learning between the lecturer and students decreases, more attention is
paid to students’ self-study. Students lose the opportunity to receive informal
emotional support from the academic staff and fellow students, and the sense of
community and belonging to a higher education institution decreases. The
research presented in the article aims to reveal students’ opinions about
students’ support and their motivation during online studies while implementing
a pilot online-taught study course. The research was conducted under the
Erasmus+ project “Quality of Virtual Studies”. Students from four higher
education institutions in Lithuania, Spain, Croatia, and Finland participated in
implementing the pilot online learning course. Study courses taught remotely
were designed based on the quality assurance criteria for virtual studies
developed during the project. Students studied the pilot online-taught study
course for three months. They completed questionnaires about their online
learning experience twice: before and after they started participating in the
course. The study results reveal that the most important source of support for
students during online studies is communication with the lecturer. It was
established that most students’ support during remote studies is provided by the
following means: personal video or email from the lecturer, clear structure of
the course studied remotely, clear procedures of the study course, and pre-
announced hours of remote consultations with the lecturer. The study reveals
that students are most motivated during online studies by receiving feedback
from the lecturer, the interest of the academic staff in students’ motivation
and motivational tools, a clear study plan of the course studied, the variety of
innovative computer technology tools used during online studies, and the
contribution of the lecturer, promoting cooperation between learners.
