Title: ‘Through the drawings…they are able to tell you straight’: Using arts-based methods in violence research in South Africa
Authors: Nataly Woollett, Nicola Christofides, Hannabeth Franchino-Olsen, Mpho Silima, Ansie Fouché
ID: openalex.W4387450569
URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0002209

Arts-based methods are underutilized in violence research and may offer improved
means of understanding these phenomena; but little is known about their value,
especially in low-resource settings. A pilot study using a cross sectional
sample was conducted in rural South Africa to determine the feasibility and
acceptability of using arts-based methods in research with adults and children,
in preparation for a longitudinal multigenerational cohort study on mechanisms
that underly the intergenerational transmission of violence. Four arts-based
methods were piloted with young adults aged 22-30 years (n = 29), children aged
4-7 years (n = 21) and former caregivers of the young adults aged 40-69 years (n
= 11). A sample of qualitative interviews were audio recorded and transcribed
(child n = 15, adults n = 19). Three focus group discussions (FGDs) were
conducted to understand implementation and lessons learnt with the six
interviewers on the study team, none of whom had used these methods in research
before. Interviews and FGDs were audio recorded, transcribed and reviewed by the
investigative team. Using a rapid analytical approach, our pilot study
demonstrated that using arts and play-based methods in multigenerational
violence research is feasible and acceptable to participants and interviewers.
These methods worked well for nearly all participants regardless of age or
ability and offered a comfortable and 'fun' way to engage in weighty
conversations. They presented benefits in their capability to facilitate
disclosure, expanding understanding, particularly around violence that is often
a stigmatizing and sensitive experience. Interviewers required increased
capacity and sensitivity in using the methods carefully, to maximize their full
potential, and ongoing mentorship was indicated. Our study adds to the
burgeoning evidence base of the effectiveness of the use of arts-based methods
in health research.
