Title: ENHANCE CULTURAL COMPETENCE AND CREATIVE ABILITIES THROUGH INNOVATION EDUCATION OF TRADITIONAL TECHNIQUES
Authors: Shui Ham Ho, Yi-Teng Shih
ID: openalex.W4386198452
URL: https://doi.org/10.35199/epde.2023.26

Due to the examination-oriented education system in Hong Kong, there is a lack
of innovative education. Based on the market research, the current creativity
education products do not contain significant elements such as cultures,
historicals or traditions that help develop students' creativity. According to
the Hong Kong Intangible Culture Heritage Office, bamboo crafts provide the
citizen with a sense of identity and continuity. Bamboo craft is one of the
famous traditional techniques in Hong Kong's culture, which are involved in
different designs in our daily life such as cookware, containers and building
techniques. Besides, there are some items that occasionally appear in seasonal
festivals or funerals such as bamboo theatres, offerings and lion-dance. The
know-how is provided with enlightening and culturally-identified elements and
knowledge to the future generation such as the maker’s mind and design process,
that contribute to their personal development and lead to preservation of the
Hong Kong traditional crafts. Furthermore, passing down craftsmanship is passing
down knowledge which is the essence of education. Possible opportunities are
identified for educating bamboo crafts for future generations in order to
cultivate students’ creativity, critical thinking and problem-solving skills.
Creative education is a process for training students’ creativity and problem-
solving skills, it helps them enhance their personal development leading to
conduce to their future careers and quality of life. The creativity and
innovation industries have become the future trend in Hong Kong's development in
order to improve worldwide competitiveness (Legislative Council Secretariat,
2015). Alison(2019) indicated that cultural differences start to emerge in the
very early stage when we are children, and those differences play out in all
sorts of subtle differences in the way we think, reason and act. Student is one
of the stages of children that are easy to integrate into different cultures.
The purpose of this study is to develop techniques for using traditional craft
learning and teaching materials to improve students' cultural and creative
abilities and to inherit traditional Hong Kong handicrafts.
