Title: The Use of Works of Musical Art in Preschool Education: A Slovak Perspective
Authors: Ivana Rochovská, Eva Dolinská, Božena Švábová
ID: openalex.W4383113898
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.22521/edupij.2023.123.4

Background/purpose – Musical art has great potential for developing a child’s
personality. Research around the world confirms that the inclusion of musical
art stimuli has a positive impact on preschool children and brings multiple
benefits. However, it needs to be led by a teacher who is competent
pedagogically, but who is also equally competent artistically. The aim of the
research was to examine the use of works of musical art in preschool education
in Slovakia from the perspective of preschool teachers. Materials/methods –
Questioning was used to meet the survey aim. The research tool was a
questionnaire constructed by the authors. In total, 366 kindergarten teachers
responded to the questionnaire. A quantitative research design was employed in
the study. Results – From the results of the research, it is possible to state
that there is a higher than average level of the current status of musical art
used in preschool education. The opportunities for kindergarten teachers to
acquire knowledge of musical art in their preservice training or other forms of
education were found to be below average. The attitude of kindergarten teachers
towards musical art can also be described as below average. Opportunities to
gain expertise in musical art were shown to statistically, significantly, and
positively predict kindergarten teachers’ attitudes toward musical art. It was
also confirmed that the kindergarten teachers’ attitude towards musical art
statistically, significantly, and positively predicts the use of works of
musical art in preschool education. Conclusion – The research findings point to
the need to increase opportunities for kindergarten teachers to acquire
professional knowledge in musical art. The results of the research may be a
stimulus for further research, such as analysis of preschool teachers’ responses
in terms of their age and pedagogical practice in order to estimate the
development of the current state of using works of musical art in preschool
education.
