Title: What do other people think he deserves? Social influence on utilization of mitigating information regarding a violent offender’s unfortunate life history
Authors: Michael J. Gill, Sinenhlanhla P. Zungu
ID: openalex.W4388758544
URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291729

The blameworthiness of an offender is often discussed in groups. Yet, the
research literature overwhelmingly examines individuals assessing
blameworthiness in isolation. To address this gap in the literature, the present
study examines group deliberations about blameworthiness, with a particular
focus on how group deliberations impact utilization of mitigating information
about an offender's unfortunate life history. Participants from introductory
psychology courses at a U.S. university were placed in groups of two or three
and each group also included a confederate who followed a script. Groups were
randomly assigned to one of four conditions. In one condition (deed only),
groups learned only about the offender's heinous crimes. In the three remaining
conditions, participants also received a historicist narrative regarding how the
offender's unfortunate history deformed his moral character. These conditions
differed in terms of the confederate's arguments: Neutral arguments, arguments
to ignore the narrative, or arguments to give great weight to the narrative.
Results showed that the historicist narrative was particularly effective at
reducing outrage and increasing compassion when the confederate argued for its
utilization. The reduction in outrage mediated a reduction in spiteful
punitiveness toward the offender. Interestingly, the confederate who urged
fellow deliberators to ignore the historicist narrative had no impact on outrage
or compassion. We also examined mediation of the impact of historicist
narratives on outrage and compassion. We found that when the confederate
remained neutral the impact of historicist narratives on outrage and compassion
was mediated via diminished perceptions of the offender's control of self-
formation. This mirrors what is typically found in prior work focused on
individual judgments. In contrast, when the confederate argued that great weight
should be given to the narrative, reductions in outrage were mediated via
diminished perceptions of offender freedom of action. This pattern of mediation
is not typically found but has been found in one previous study where
participants received social encouragement to mitigate blame. Results are
discussed in terms of how social influence might alter the inferences draw from
historicist narratives. Suggestions for future research on social influence in
the context of blame are presented.
