Title: How is substance use portrayed in digital media and what impacts can it have?
Authors: Benjamin C. Riordan, Damian Scarf, Jennifer E. Merrill, Megan S. C. Lim, Emmanuel Kuntsche
ID: openalex.W4389149844
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/dar.13784

In 2021, Facebook Inc. changed its name to Meta. At first glance, the updated
name simply reflected that the company had grown to own not just the Facebook
platform, but also Instagram, Threads, WhatsApp and a desire to branch out and
include virtual reality [1]. The term “meta,” however, has a deeper meaning.
Meta is short for metaverse, a word coined by Neal Stephenson in his dystopian
novel Snow Crash. The metaverse is a hypothetical future state where people
“live” in a virtual world. It is a common trope in film and literature,
including popular films like The Matrix and Ready Player One. Although a
virtual-reality-based future appears unlikely, people do spend a considerable
portion of their wakeful hours consuming digital media (e.g., social media,
watching films, listening to music) [2]. One might wonder what people spend all
their time looking at and whether it matters. In the context of substance use,
the 12 papers in this special section aim to address both of these important
questions. A recent meta-analysis found that posts that referenced alcohol
(91.6%), poly-substance use (87.9%), e-cigarettes (85.9%), cannabis (79.5%) or
tobacco (59.8%) were predominantly positive in nature [3], meaning that they
primarily referenced “good” things about substance use. Only posts referencing
opiates were more often negative (55.5%) than positive. Identifying how
substances are portrayed on social media may be particularly important for
understanding the link between social media and substance use, as several
theories (e.g., social norms theory, social learning theory) suggest that
greater exposure to substance-related posts (particularly those that are
positive in nature) may contribute to the perception that substance use is
common and acceptable, and/or that substance use leads to positive outcomes. In
this special section, a range of research methods (e.g., focus groups, social
media data collection), populations (e.g., adolescents) and social media
platforms (e.g., Twitter, TikTok) were studied to dig deeper into how “positive”
posts about substances may be. For example, Corcoran et al.'s [4] focus group
study aligned with prior work and found that adolescents reported that alcohol-
related posts on social media convey drinking as acceptable, normal and cool
[4]. Similarly, Lim et al.'s [5] content analysis of medicinal-cannabis-related
tweets showed that tweets touting the therapeutic value of cannabis are twice as
common as those referencing intoxication and withdrawal. Both studies extend
prior work by providing more nuance to the type of content that may be perceived
positively by those who view it. Interestingly, both Whelan et al. [6] and
Mathieson et al. [7] demonstrate that this tendency for substance use posts to
be positive may not extend to all substances. Whelan et al. found that the
plurality of MDMA-related TikTok videos were neutral (40.6%), but posts were
still more likely to be positive (34.9%) than negative (17.9%) [6]. Likewise,
Mathieson et al. report that gabapentinoid-related tweets tend to be neutral
(48.4% gabapentin/68.2% pregabalin), but that negative tweets (30.0%
gabapentin/22.7% pregabalin) are more common than positive tweets (21.6%
gabapentin/9.1% pregabalin) [7]. Thus, while the papers in the special section
reiterate the finding that the portrayal of popular substances (i.e., alcohol or
cannabis) is predominantly positive, they also suggest that this may not be the
case for all substances. Beyond manual content analysis of social media posts,
emerging machine learning techniques allow researchers to analyse posts at scale
[8]. Although sacrificing some degree of depth and nuance relative to deeper
thematic analyses, machine learning can analyse extremely large datasets in
close to real time [8]. In their systematic review, Fuller et al. [9] found that
posts advertising the sale of illicit substances were extremely common on social
media platforms, but they note that moving forward the challenge is to develop
algorithms that can go beyond basic keywords and sentiment analysis to detect
the increasingly sophisticated strategies that are used to advertise drugs on
social media. Addressing this challenge will require collaboration between
social and computer scientists to develop machine learning algorithms trained on
more diverse and complex data (e.g., multiple substances, different countries,
posts from multiple sites). Reflecting the wider literature [10], four papers in
the special section provide an affirmative “yes” for the link between self-
reported exposure to substance use on social media and substance use. Speaking
to the robustness of the effect, the association between exposure to substance
use holds across the various approaches, samples and measures of exposure
[11-14]. While most previous research has focused on exposure to peers'
substance use posting or substance use posting in general, three of the included
studies focused on exposure to influencer alcohol posts. Influencers are often
held in high regard by people who follow them and may be particularly
influential as people emulate their behaviour and aspire to be more like them
[14]. To measure the impact of influencer exposure, Strowger et al. [12] asked
participants to list the top five influencers they followed and estimate how
often they post about alcohol. They found people who reported greater alcohol
exposure from influencers consumed more alcohol (quantity, peak alcohol use)
even when controlling for alcohol exposure from close peers. Similarly, Steers
et al. [11] reported positive bivariate correlations between frequency of liking
or commenting on influencers' alcohol-related posts and peak drinks and alcohol-
related consequences. Regarding mechanisms, Cristello et al. [14] provided some
evidence that such associations may be explained by social norms, finding that
the link between exposure to influencer alcohol posts and alcohol use was
statistically mediated by injunctive norms (a similar mechanism noted for
exposure to peer's substance use). One noted limitation with the current papers
and the field at large is the reliance on self-reported exposure to social media
content, which may be difficult for participants to remember and accurately
report. Although some scholars have argued that perceived exposure may be more
important than actual exposure [15], more accurate measures of exposure may be
more convincing for prevention and intervention (e.g., to demonstrate the need
to reduce exposure in order to reduce alcohol use). Therefore, future research
should aim to provide more accurate evidence for the link between digital
content exposure and substance use using objective measures of exposure to
substance use content. Recent data collection approaches employing screen
recording or intermittent screen shots may be a key next step [16, 17].
Similarly, experimental studies may offer additional evidence for the link
between exposure and use by manipulating content people are exposed to in
controlled settings (similar to Willoughby et al. [18] in the current special
section). Given the link between exposure and use, reducing exposure to
substance depictions in popular media may be a key strategy for reducing use.
However, policy recommendations often focus specifically on reducing traditional
advertising [19], neglecting the user-generated content or non-advertising
content. For example, 86% of popular films included at least one depiction of
alcohol and alcohol is even common in films aimed at younger audiences [20].
Patsouras et al. suggested that one barrier to implementing policies that aim to
reduce or mitigate the impact of exposure is that people drastically
underestimate how much alcohol there is in popular films [21, 22]. Thus, they
aimed to determine whether informing people about the amount of alcohol in
popular films and the impact of exposure would make people more supportive of
restrictive alcohol-related film policies (e.g., including messages before a
film about alcohol sponsorship or amount of alcohol depicted [22]). Although
they found that participants who received the information did not rate the
policies more favourably than participants in a control group, both groups were
relatively supportive of several policies, particularly those focused on
reducing exposure in films targeting youth (e.g., alcohol should be included in
film classification/rating system). This suggests that the public is already
supportive of the introduction of restrictive film policies to mitigate the
potential harm of exposure. Several papers included in this special section
identified that social media may offer a key platform for potential outreach and
that monitoring how substance use is discussed may help identify areas that
social media campaigns should focus on. For example, both Matheson et al. [7]
and Whelan et al. [6] identified that the lack of harm-related posts indicated
the opportunity for outreach to increase awareness about harms and Lim et al.
[5] suggested that monitoring posts about medicinal cannabis could be important
to counter unsubstantiated health claims. Fuller et al. [9] also noted in their
systematic review that social media prevention campaigns were one of the most
common interventions recommended in the papers they reviewed, but that thorough
evaluations of these types of campaigns are limited. The evidence shows that
these interventions may be effective, but they struggle to achieve the reach
needed to create meaningful impact in an overcrowded market [23, 24]. Thus,
although this approach is often recommended, it is a key area for future
research to better understand how to effectively implement outreach campaigns
and measure the effectiveness of these approaches. The included contributions
highlight how substance use is discussed in digital media, the impact of
exposure, and key areas for policy and intervention. They also identify key
areas for future research, which should focus on implementing new methods like
machine learning to better understand how substances are discussed in social
media, more objective measures of substance use exposure, and additional work
evaluating the effectiveness of public outreach campaigns on social media. An
ongoing issue will be whether research can keep up with the metaverse (e.g., the
development of new platforms [1]) and the added difficulty that a substantial
amount of content is user-produced rather than paid advertisements. In the film
The Matrix, people were tricked into living in a virtual world, completely
unaware that their physical bodies were being used as an energy source. In the
context of substance use, it will be increasingly important for people to have a
critical lens on their digital media use, lest they be tricked into consuming
and creating substance-related content glorifying substance use that advertisers
could never get away with producing. BR wrote the first draft of the manuscript.
DS, JM, ML, and EK provided feedback and revised the first draft. The authors
declare no conflicts of interest.
