Title: Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis: interdisciplinary creative art practice and nature connections
Authors: Catherine Baker, Nina Morris, Athanasios I. Tsirikos, Olga Fotakopoulou, Flora Parrott
ID: openalex.W4390047739
URL: https://doi.org/10.1136/medhum-2023-012796

Scoliosis is an abnormal lateral curvature of the spine with the large majority
of cases classed as idiopathic, meaning there is no known cause. Typically, most
cases occur in children and young people affecting approximately three per cent
of the adult populace with five out of six cases being female. The <i>BackBone:
Interdisciplinary Creative Practices and Body Positive Resilience</i> pilot
research study used arts and humanities methods to measure the impact of
adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) on well-being and body perception. The
research aimed to contribute to a better understanding of alternative treatments
towards improving quality of life in young women diagnosed with AIS. In
particular, concentrating on two highlighted priorities from the Scoliosis
Priority Setting Partnership: (1) How is quality of life affected by scoliosis
and its treatment? How can we measure this in ways that are meaningful to
patients? (2) How are the psychological impacts (including on body image) of
diagnosis and treatment best managed.Using established medical techniques, art-
based workshops, and focus groups with postoperative participants with AIS and
their families we gathered both quantitative and qualitative data. The workshops
explored the aesthetics of imperfection through material investigations that
focus on the body as both an object and how it is experienced using the metaphor
of tree images. Drawing parallels between the growth patterns of trees that, for
complex and often unknown reasons, have grown unexpectedly we explored questions
around ideological notions of perfect growth through art-making in a non-
clinical setting. Uniquely, the pilot project sought to draw on insights from
four key disciplines (art, medicine, psychology and human geography), thinking
across boundaries to evoke different ways of knowing and understanding the
complexities of body perception through image-making.
