Title: Who is sensitising whom? A participatory interview guide development as an awareness tool within a health care research project
Authors: Ute Kalender, Sabine Wiegmann, Martina Ernst, Loretta Ihme, Uta Neumann
ID: openalex.W4379276511
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e16778

In the methodological discourse on the qualitative, guided interview, well-
composed interview guides are considered suitable instruments for collecting
data and generating complex narratives on specific topics. In addition to
deciding on an interview form, reflection on how and which questions to ask is
described as the most important preliminary work for a qualitative interview
[[1]Helfferich C. Die Qualität qualitativer Daten. Manual für die Durchführung
qualitativer Interviews. VS Verlag, Wiesbaden2011Google Scholar] and the semi-
structured interview guide is the most frequently used tool in qualitative
research [[2]Kallio H. et al.Systematic methodological review: developing a
framework for a qualitative semi-structured interview guide.J. Adv. Nurs. 2016;
72: 2954-2965https://doi.org/10.1111/jan.13031Crossref PubMed Scopus (823)
Google Scholar,[3]DiCicco-Bloom B. Crabtree B.F. The qualitative research
interview.Med. Educ. 2006; 40:
314-321https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2929.2006.02418.xCrossref PubMed Scopus
(1785) Google Scholar]. However, the interview guide is considered to play a
tricky, ambivalent role: The guide can reinforce or mitigate interviewing
errors, pretend too much or too little, and perpetuate the problematic attitude
of the questioner to evoke only their own knowledge and viewpoints from the
interviewee [[1]Helfferich C. Die Qualität qualitativer Daten. Manual für die
Durchführung qualitativer Interviews. VS Verlag, Wiesbaden2011Google
Scholar,[4]Breuer F. Reflexive Grounded Theory. Eine Einführung für die
Forschungspraxis. VS Verlag, Wiesbaden2010Crossref Google Scholar,[5]Kruse J. ht
tp://www.unikoeln.de/hf/konstrukt/didaktik/biografiearbeit/seminarreader%20biogr
aphiearbeit%20und%20biographieforschung.pdfDate: 2013Date accessed: September 6,
2022Google Scholar]. In short, the interview guide is involved in power
relations in the interview situation and is a central actor in their
reinforcement, exercise, or mitigation. Yet, the research literature has so far
questioned the powerful process of interview guide composition mainly
unidirectionally from the interviewers to the interviewees [[1]Helfferich C. Die
Qualität qualitativer Daten. Manual für die Durchführung qualitativer
Interviews. VS Verlag, Wiesbaden2011Google Scholar,[2]Kallio H. et al.Systematic
methodological review: developing a framework for a qualitative semi-structured
interview guide.J. Adv. Nurs. 2016; 72:
2954-2965https://doi.org/10.1111/jan.13031Crossref PubMed Scopus (823) Google
Scholar,[6]Busetto L. Wick W. Gumbinger C. How to use and assess qualitative
research methods.Neurol. Res. Pract. 2020; 14: 1-10Google Scholar]: while
interview types such as biographical interviews certainly do set different
emphases in openness and closedness of questions and some theoretical
conceptions of qualitative interviewing suggest to not use a guide at all,
methodological reflections on the interview guide within guided interviews focus
mainly on the researchers, who actively construct the interview guide. Semi-
structured, guided interviews are illuminated in terms of how they would more or
less legitimately direct and control the researched and what is said in the
interview situation. In this setting, the respondents may refuse, hesitate,
dither, or even keep silent, but the researchers remain the actual actors as
they and their accomplice – the interview guide – specify and significantly
shape the research situation. According to Thompson (2021), through the design
of the interview guide, the researchers specify “what a dialogue is and what is
to be represented” [[7]Thompson V. Partizipative Reflexivität postkolonialer
Ethnografie und Möglichkeiten des Schweigens als Kritik.in: Flick S. Herold A.
Zur Kritik der partizipativen Forschung. Forschungspraxis im Spiegel der
Kritischen Theorie. Beltz Juventa, Weinheim Basel2021: 248-265Google Scholar].
Without negating structural hierarchies in the interview situation, we here take
a different perspective that has so far been less illuminated in theoretical and
methodological discussions about interview guide production. We explore how a
collaborative process, following the criteria of participatory research, can
weaken the power effects of the interview guide and mitigate a paternalistic
attitude of the interviewers towards the interviewees. We are interested in how
the collaborative design of the interview guide initiates negotiation processes
between the researchers, the interviewees – hereafter referred to as co-
researchers – and within a research team. We start by exploring theories on
interview guide development, then describe our aims, purposes and research
questions, depict our findings as four epiphanies and finally departing from
theories of interview guides give recommendations for other researchers. To date
there are many manuals, guidelines, and practical instructions on how to design
an interview guide. For example, systematic methodological reviews such as
Kallio et al. “provide a practical tool for researchers developing a semi-
structured interview guide as a data collection method” [[2]Kallio H. et
al.Systematic methodological review: developing a framework for a qualitative
semi-structured interview guide.J. Adv. Nurs. 2016; 72:
2954-2965https://doi.org/10.1111/jan.13031Crossref PubMed Scopus (823) Google
Scholar]. However, there is no specific theory that focuses exclusively on the
use of guides in qualitative interviews, let alone on a theory of the semi-
structured guide. Rather, guides are part of various theoretical approaches and
methods used in qualitative research. Guides themselves often do not strictly
follow a particular theoretical approach, but in turn are considered to serve as
a tool to support a broader theoretical perspective. What does exist is a
considerable body of work on theorizing the interview, the interviewer and the
interview situation [[8]Roulston K. Reflective Interviewing. A Guide to Theory
and Practice. Sage, Los Angeles2010Crossref Google Scholar]. These contributions
do tackle theoretical conceptions of how to construct research instruments such
as the semi-structured interview guide – but rather implicitly. In her
comprehensive guide to the theory and practice of reflective inquiry, Kathryn
Roulston (2010) refers to a wide variety of theoretical conceptions of the
qualitative interview [[8]Roulston K. Reflective Interviewing. A Guide to Theory
and Practice. Sage, Los Angeles2010Crossref Google Scholar]. We first introduce
theories of interviewing which are most relevant for us and delineate the
enclosed conceptions of the interview guide. We secondly justify our chosen
theoretical markers for the interview guide. are in much qualitative research
[[8]Roulston K. Reflective Interviewing. A Guide to Theory and Practice. Sage,
Los Angeles2010Crossref Google Scholar]. is an in the of that that knowledge can
be through the use of In conceptions of the interview, the interviewer as a
rather which and as as The interviewer data and findings [[8]Roulston K.
Reflective Interviewing. A Guide to Theory and Practice. Sage, Los
Angeles2010Crossref Google Scholar]. In approaches to a guide a tool to support
and systematic research by the who as much knowledge as in about the of the The
interview guide to be of in a The guide a of in the interview situation and the
are to be more they do not the interviewer has the [[8]Roulston K. Reflective
Interviewing. A Guide to Theory and Practice. Sage, Los Angeles2010Crossref
Google Scholar]. design of the guide is not in a A of the interview is the K. L.
interviewing and theory The of the of the Scopus Google Scholar] which the
interviewer and interviewee as in and of about research topics. The of how the
interviewer and interviewee of the research and of narratives [[8]Roulston K.
Reflective Interviewing. A Guide to Theory and Practice. Sage, Los
Angeles2010Crossref Google Scholar]. In a approach, the interview guide does not
play a For even an interview guide her to the interview, as to keep the
interview and K. L. interviewing and theory The of the of the Scopus Google
Scholar]. The guide is more a of a The interview guide or questions the to of of
and does not the interview situation. In a of the interview the interviewer the
interviewee and may work in to and the research an of in 2006; Scopus Google and
the of Educ. Res. J. Scopus Google Educ. Google Scholar]. The interviewer and
interviewee or as an of of data of that interviewer and interviewee as in
dialogue that how they their According to the of interviewing is for
[[8]Roulston K. Reflective Interviewing. A Guide to Theory and Practice. Sage,
Los Angeles2010Crossref Google Scholar]. methods and on and theoretical example,
and [[8]Roulston K. Reflective Interviewing. A Guide to Theory and Practice.
Sage, Los Angeles2010Crossref Google Scholar]. interviews do not use in
interview but to conceptions These questions that the interview situation a The
questions the researchers to “provide a for to and that [[8]Roulston K.
Reflective Interviewing. A Guide to Theory and Practice. Sage, Los
Angeles2010Crossref Google Scholar]. the the interviewer does not to a interview
guide but and to more about the they to the [[8]Roulston K. Reflective
Interviewing. A Guide to Theory and Practice. Sage, Los Angeles2010Crossref
Google Scholar] and of what of questions, conceptions such as or from data
collection and the of in focus 2006; Scopus Google Scholar]. We theory of the
interview, in the of and by the a towards interviewing we the that the interview
guide to be of questions, that questions which as as to the of the in a The
perspective and of in the be about and for example, comprehensive biographical
work or the we give to an interview guide as a data tool from the other theories
of the In a the guide has not such a often does not use an interview guide at
different to the which more to we to a rather In our interview guide but not has
to of that For example, the of the interview not to a not our first to the
interviewees or conceptions The of our interview guide towards but only to a –
and not our so we only a of However, we the on conceptions of the interview for
the of and researched and not that data is and A. a in H. Scholar]. We and that
the interviewer the interviewee and may work in to design and the research is
the we on theoretical of the other are more suitable for a participatory towards
the guide. a process in which the and questions of the interview guide are or a
suitable for our on the and data and as from and on the following data and
research and the the and is by K. L. interviewing and theory The of the of the
Scopus Google Scholar] The interviewee is to in developing the interview guide.
The interview guide is not a tool but part of the of the interviewees. The
interview guide on research topics. in about the interview guide and the of our
we for the interview in which the to and the of rather that may be on the part
of interviewer or K. L. interviewing and theory The of the of the Scopus Google
Scholar]. In in terms of we more towards a attitude as we use a semi-structured
interview guide. In terms of we towards the of the other to we and in a semi-
structured interview guide. The of this is to how an interview guide to the
criteria of participatory research can the attitude of the interviewers and
weaken the power effects of the interview guide. be by the processes of the
interview guide the interviewees. To the of this and the that the interview
guide to the the in the questions and reflections in the of the The of this is
to a research how to a semi-structured interview [[2]Kallio H. et al.Systematic
methodological review: developing a framework for a qualitative semi-structured
interview guide.J. Adv. Nurs. 2016; 72:
2954-2965https://doi.org/10.1111/jan.13031Crossref PubMed Scopus (823) Google
Scholar]. The process how to a semi-structured interview guide has been
researched from a participatory perspective and there is a of that focus on the
of semi-structured guide by the researchers and the The of this is to how such
can be in a participatory research questions How can the semi-structured
interview guide be and how can the process of the interview guide an on the How
can that be What does the process of the interview guide to the The semi-
structured interview guide for the qualitative of the focus is on the and of for
and a of and their The a variety of that can be to the in and and in
development, or of are the and or of the or development, as as the of The
participatory of co-researchers in the interview guide is part of the broader
participatory of the the research process is and are – and the are actively
involved the The of participatory research is and for and not about and of
involved be and considered for knowledge Die qualitativer der partizipativen S.
Zur Kritik der im Flick S. Herold A. Zur Kritik der partizipativen Forschung.
Forschungspraxis im Spiegel der Kritischen Theorie. Beltz Juventa, Weinheim
Basel2021: Scholar]. are to of the – of – particular to on a participatory has
the of for a A of often in the of to S. A. et im und und und 2016; C. S. on of
2006; PubMed Scopus Google Scholar]. often been of often or comprehensive or of
the to their referred to as the that to and a in most would to an In this in and
about in J. PubMed Scopus Google and the situation of has a The Scholar] and the
Scholar] for to be only in The of of the which has been this in recommendations
and the to and in für für und 2016; der Scopus Google Scholar]. in the for the
of in only in or that be to an the can on are in by the the guide for
qualitative of is part of a in towards the that an a a for a and and that this
openness to in be the and The semi-structured interview is considered as between
the interviewer and [[2]Kallio H. et al.Systematic methodological review:
developing a framework for a qualitative semi-structured interview guide.J. Adv.
Nurs. 2016; 72: 2954-2965https://doi.org/10.1111/jan.13031Crossref PubMed Scopus
(823) Google A. the and from to and Scholar] and the of participatory research
is described to the of instruments interview H. Partizipative Forschung.
Einführung in die VS Google Scholar]. Yet, there has not been much systematic
exploring on how the co-researchers can be involved in the process of an
interview guide, let alone a semi-structured interview guide. The participatory
is often only only the guide has been of participatory research H. Partizipative
Forschung. Einführung in die VS Google we that data through through the of in as
questions as we first and that participatory in a tool can the interview
situation. focuses on the and that the of a semi-structured interview guide for
a qualitative interview These processes the interview guide not by a but by and
The interview part of the broader the of et al. S. et a focus on Google Scholar]
that the interviewees in our the as of the be in the of the interview the by the
from the of the interview in the of the interview The researchers that in this
the interview guide would a knowledge of the various that is as as complex as
and qualitative methods do not for and in a and The of this of and from the of
the qualitative researchers. are for which the the research process and
reflections and on the on the use of research or on The literature mainly
theoretical and K. K. in der VS für Google Die der der Grounded K. Grounded
Theory für Scholar]. the of participatory research, we in turn here that are
important for and what is to and we to of a that and the process of interview
guide These the and of as we The in a of a research and is of the instruments
for data collection A. und als in VS Verlag, Google Scholar]. The is a and
reflection in which the and at the and and be We to epiphanies – to in the
research process that and as or of from a of Nurs. PubMed Scopus Google
Scholar]. We the interview guide research on the four the of the to be and the
of the interview guide. We on practical knowledge and from the to on the of the
and various In we in in which of the to the We part in to the the and and of and
their in different interview guides for the and and in this These guides to and
of the the research instruments and to us their and The process of the interview
guide – the from the first to first use in an interview – a of and in the of the
no or The guides to and of the involved in the the no criteria used and These
participatory preliminary processes of the in the that they of and The to be and
the guide. some of the qualitative researchers, some from the to be and The to
the researchers as we they would not only the of the guide but be the for – of
and We this collaborative process on the of four epiphanies that we in our and
methodological the process of the interview guide. is in her has been a at only
for a and the a of the which is in the for – as the or of which is by and are
and the is and – B. B. K. Google Scholar]. in such an to the is the for and of
of and is the is to be in of and be in their own of and der C. Kritik an und
Scholar]. For terms such as or as they a and to the of and a for no or is or in
are to be as A is of of and are the of is and for who be and to the and – or who
do not themselves – are questioned A. und und der und Google Scholar]. is for a
of and is at many in the For example, the research that does not an of that is
by is to the on the of the in the to which are for the or what the The on the of
which and the use – or The researchers the and the which important preliminary
work for in a the to the for These an of as a to on their own of and
development, and to their own attitude towards of The a on the of not first and
on the and for The is is which the as and a of and the in take her own that
would follow a of that as by and as or The to a of the and and their own and
important preliminary work for the the of their and the on to the first to co-
researchers which how the be the in turn the interviewees that the would the of
in the of the a in the of a at the In the of the approach, the of the co-
researchers data K. L. interviewing and theory The of the of the Scopus Google
However, are the of a we the first interview guides to the and ask for The that
that the interview guide refers to in the The would not to a or to or her The
would not their as and would the The that the interview guide ask they at
between and and they would on development, of or the guide on focus the on The
guide ask about the the to take on a How would respondents about to take a in
the and in the for the of their and are terms towards which or at has to use the
they would and a of would turn a of that is to be for and for the alone is a be
a the interview guide suggest that are a an that be through The of the from the
that has a has the to has in a that even can and be that many a do not
themselves as at all, that a between the is not relevant to and that is a on
from the refers to this as and in the discourse of the discourse of can effects
– B. B. K. Google Scholar]. a refers to or as then does not but rather the only
a and a The is a the of the discourse of which be as the following as – as a of
while is that the other has a or her and questions, as the that the is and this
the attitude of many in that a is to be for for In the research of the specific
of the co-researchers of and in their – in their we the interview guides to the
in to the of the and the interviewees. In of the first guide for and first the
following for an important in to what In the that of in In such research, or use
to that there in which and not the most important for J. im Google C. Die der
Die und Scholar]. In the of for example, the between and less between of
different that often for – or J. im Google C. Die der Die und Scholar]. The much
more for the the of and in the by and The as literature to less between and
between and this in to a for the co-researchers to about a of and in their the
interview guide has been to the the of a – but – that this to do the The between
this and an of the is not to to be rather of there are of this on by the of the
at the in her that her questions are The situation to a that a or to the of a in
this to an a problematic to questions of in turn are not about their or how they
would their for they a for a to the a that not be about the of their in and
certainly not in would be and has to do their as questions would far the actual
of the interview guide – the Guide In there is a between how the interview guide
the and how the as a to about in the the to about this in their only then that
the interview guide a between researchers and who to the interview then to is
not rather interviewers and their and about their These are on as the topics. In
her qualitative the guides for as of this by the the is of the that the first of
the interview guides perpetuate a power The interview guides the as and and
their However, the interview guide does not by their but their by as in a to
their The interview guide focuses on – – the respondents and to their an
important in the interview guide. this of the research process, they are not
only but and In this power relations in the first interview guides can be they
are In and reflection processes are the which to the complex of their
interviewees and in which they to a A is often that data are only from who – and
not from who about a research that to the but not of a can be to do not in a
even the there for what of is not to from which can be as a or even a in
research in in this such questions are of that in this but that is part of in
the and of in there has been a in less a has that a and collaborative of a to a
However, and research often remain in a in which the of and and their are not In
some of the of of and are a of may not in are the of which is they and that to
they that may not be to do that What does this to do our interview guide How do
we are not in this this even relevant to our research about the of the but the
the has an on the actual of How can and at the research take in a that between
and openness about and of How does no on the of and no of the as a qualitative
take on In the that the of the and interview guide development, to from a
variety of and and and then is what in the has questions are but is often a of
and a to for in and In not to be as in the the process of interview guide
development, we questions to the of the The of for has the in the are part of a
and not we do not actively for example, the of the of in to we an in our guides
for and about how they to do their we to a to on this important to the
interviewees. the of some to be in this the first and in a direct of questions
in the the and epiphanies not in questions or the epiphanies certainly an on
interview guide The that we are in a the The of the epiphanies is more an
attitude that we in the focuses on research that qualitative researchers in
their and A. und als in VS Verlag, Google Scholar]. and the of In other the and
this are not the of a of different data through many but are on the of the the
other this can be as an For a of the is that the processes can be as or are not
in interview A. und als in VS Verlag, Google Scholar]. For the most of the
interviewer in the interview guide. The research a in most the interview guide a
often only at the of a or a research of a is that a collaborative design of the
guide is not We on and conceptions of interviewing and considered as theoretical
markers the interview guide. this we to mitigate the of the this is in of the
qualitative researchers who are researchers. to do to the of their co-
researchers and to However, and in a their to in – from to to and an that
significantly questioned by or from the The of as particular for researchers and
the of co-researchers in the process of a semi-structured guide the various and
of the co-researchers and to research questions their to a research as the
interview guide, we that of an interview guide can be by participatory and on we
give recommendations on the design of research instruments in a participatory
and collaborative We that interview guides can negotiation processes within and
between researchers and In the the negotiation processes often about what in to
of and The themselves as or of their to that many do not their as or or and in
on different of and as researchers such own towards and participatory research
from researchers the attitude of and of their own of The collaborative design of
the interview guide that of researchers that at first to be do not to an on
their not co-researchers the of the but this perspective as a The that of the of
as or the researchers on their own viewpoints in the research instruments and
research and perpetuate power and and on the that the interview guide as while
and respondents as by – by – their We to the interview guide in a participatory
and co-researchers to give and the The then can turn the interview guide a a and
the interview situation more towards for the and not the in our the for the and
their the that guide, no how through does an is [[1]Helfferich C. Die Qualität
qualitativer Daten. Manual für die Durchführung qualitativer Interviews. VS
Verlag, Wiesbaden2011Google Scholar]. is We can only about this but is a that
interview guide, no how a and of of no how an that is in semi-structured
interviews are ambivalent instruments that from and a problematic of the
interviewer as a rather as much as interviewers are part of For the in broader
questions of how to in The that a a has to the that to the and an is a for and
and support by and To as is the for a However, the of the guide has that how
that openness be is not at The negotiation of and between the interviewers and
the interviewees has the for a in to be to the in the first
