Title: Telling images : an ethnography of young children's creation of narratives in response to works of art.
Authors: Faith T Wint
ID: openalex.W90558657
URL: https://scholarworks.umass.edu/dissertations_1/5773

The purpose of this study is to describe and interpret young children's shared
narrative construction and story acting practices within an early childhood
visual arts program. Narrative and story acting offer children unique
opportunities to explore ideas, thoughts, and questions. Listening to children
and trying to understand their perspectives, thought processes, and experiences
is a necessary and vital way of illuminating our understanding of curriculum
practice. Based on the researcher's kindergarten art workshop program, this
inquiry specifically addresses: (a) What is the context (the structure and
organization) of the shared narrative process to be studied? (b) What are the
major themes that emerge in the children's small group narrative? (c) What does
this collection of narratives tell about what these particular kindergarten
students feel and think about their world? This study provided an ethnographic-
type account of the young children's co-constructed narratives in response to
works of art. The study included 18 children from a private Montessori school in
the northeast. The kindergartners worked in three separate small groups of six.
Each group took part in 9 sessions. The children ranged in age from 4.9 to 5.9
years old. The primary methodology is that of participant observation. The
design of this project is exploratory, descriptive, and interpretive in nature.
The data in this study was gathered via audiotape and observational field notes.
Data analysis primarily consisted of reviewing field notes to identify themes,
patterns, events, and actions in the children's narrative activities as well as
to generate working hypotheses. The application of the coding system by Wolf
(2002) aided classifying co-constructed conversational sequences in order to
allow the frequencies of each category to be calculated and compared. Analysis
consists of the three aspects of data transformation advanced by Wolcott (1994).
This ethnographic research emphasized the importance of listening to children's
voices.
