Title: A Systematic Literature Review of Gamification in/for Cultural Heritage: Leveling up, Going Beyond
Authors: Célio Gonçalo Marques, João Paulo Borges Pedro, Inês Araújo
ID: openalex.W4386028762
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/heritage6080312

Because of the possibilities that it opens for a variety of fields and
practices, gamification has increasingly garnered significant attention. This
has put it at the forefront of many significant debates around its applicability
and implications. In the case of its application to cultural heritage, although
there is much trailblazing to do, the body of work has been growing and the
field is gaining its maturity. As such, this paper aims to take stock of the
directions the field has been moving towards—to provide orientation for future
work and projects that are yet to be developed. To do this, the paper aims to
map out the publications in the field of gamified cultural heritage, by
conducting a broader and systematic literature review. The study has found that,
with regards to who the main actors with publications in the field are, a
prominence of European institutions and networks, namely from Italy, Greece and
the United Kingdom, can be observed. Regarding what heritage is being gamified
and for what purpose, the study found a prominence of focus on historical,
architectural and archeological heritage values and a very significant focus on
gamification being used for motivation/engagement and for creativity
enhancement. When looking at the gamification design dimensions that are given
prevalence, intrinsic motivation seems to be prioritized, and, with regards to
the observed target publics, tourists and visitors and seem to prevail in
gamified heritage projects, with children as a specific group coming in second.
Regarding technologies and tools being used, Mobile Applications, Augmented
Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR) are particularly prevalent. Regarding
mentioned future orientations, the study found that a vast majority of papers
are self-contained, both in scope of work and discussion, with most of those
that do mention future directions indicating continuation and/or expansion of
their specific project.
