Title: PROJECT ACTIVITY AS A MEANS OF FORMING IDEASOF SUSTAINABLE ENVIRONMENTAL DEVELOPMENTIN PRESCHOOL CHILDREN
Authors: Olga V. Pustovoitova, Natalya Vedeshkina
ID: openalex.W4388504299
URL: http://doi.org/10.61365/forum.2023.134

Modern society needs a constructive person who is able to learn about the world
around through activity, to realize potential, to show initiative and creative
approaches to solving pressing problems. Formation of ideas about sustainable
development in children at the stage of preschool education will not only lay
the foundations for respect for the environment, but also form the ability to
live in a sustainable world in harmony with society, nature and oneself.
Sustainable development is understood as a process that includes three
components: social, economic and environmental. The purpose of the study is to
test the hypothesis that digital technologies, namely the development of
projects in the algorithmic language Scratch, will allow children to form ideas
about sustainable environmental development. The research methods were a
conversation with preschool children on the subject of sustainable environmental
development, the study of theoretical and practical material in the authors’
studies on the problem of sustainable development, as well as an experiment
applying the methods by O.A. Solomennikova “The World of Animals and Birds” and
“The Plant World”; by A. I. Ivanova “Describe the picture”. After the formative
stage of experimental work, taking into account the use of digital programming
technology in the Scratch program, diagnostics were carried out that showed
signifi cant increase in the level of children’s ideas about sustainable
environmental development. Thus, a high level was detected in % of older
preschoolers (%), an average level was detected in % of older preschoolers
(%), a low level was detected in % of older preschoolers of the group (%).
Thus, we can conclude that the use of the Scratch digital tool can achieve the
desired effect in terms of shaping the sustainable environmental development of
preschool children.
