Title: Variations in gender identity and sexual orientation of university students
Authors: Tomoko Yoshida, Keiko Matsubara, Hiroko Ogata‐Kawata, Mami Miyado, Keisuke Ishiwata
ID: openalex.W4388640484
URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/sexmed/qfad057

Abstract Background Previous studies have shown that a small percentage of
people in the general population have atypical gender identity and/or sexual
orientation. Aim This study aimed to explore variations in gender identity and
sexual orientation in university students and determine genetic factors
associated with these variations. Methods Deviations from complete gender
congruence and exclusive heterosexual orientation in 736 Japanese university
students were quantitatively assessed with self-assessment questionnaires. Next,
we conducted genetic tests for 80 participants who showed relatively low gender
identity scores and/or atypical sexual orientation. These genetic tests
consisted of repeat number analysis of the androgen receptor gene (AR) and a
SKAT-O: an optimal unified sequence kernel association test, which is an exome-
based rare variant association study. The results of the genetic tests were
compared with the Japanese reference data and the results of our 637 control
samples. Outcomes We calculated the gender identity and sexual orientation
scores of all participants and analyzed the molecular data of 80 selected
participants. Results The gender identity scores of 736 participants were
broadly distributed: only ~15% of natal males and ~5% of natal females had the
maximum score that corresponds to complete gender congruence. The sexual
orientation scores also varied: ~80% of natal males and ~60% of natal females
showed exclusive heterosexual orientation. We found no association between
gender characteristics and AR repeat numbers. The SKAT-O showed that rare
damaging variants of TDRP and 3 other genes were more common in the 80
participants than in the control group. Clinical Implications Our data support
the view that gender is a phenotypic continuum rather than a binary trait.
Strength and Limitations This study quantitatively assessed the gender
characteristics of a large cohort of university students. Moreover, we conducted
systematic screening for genetic factors associated with gender variations. The
weaknesses of the study were the limited analytic power of the questionnaires,
the relatively small sample for molecular analyses, and incomplete clinical
information and relatively advanced ages of the control group. Conclusion This
study revealed significant variations in gender identity and sexual orientation
in university students, which may be partly associated with variants in TDRP or
other genes.
