Title: The Role of The Family in The Success of Exclusive Breastfeeding
Authors: Elvalini Warnelis Sinaga, Mahyunidar Mahyunidar, Risa Tantri Gultom
ID: openalex.W4368374474
URL: https://doi.org/10.30829/contagion.v5i2.14818

Support of others is a key factor for mothers who choose to breastfeed their
infants, including those who balance work outside the home and breastfeeding.
However, little research has been done to understand how maternal support during
the postpartum period impacts mothers' ability to later balance work and
breastfeeding, in particular full-time work and exclusive breastfeeding. The
results of this qualitative study indicate that the timing of support plays a
key role in mothers' ability to successfully overcome barriers during the early
postpartum period, thus building maternal self-efficacy in addressing problems
encountered when they return to work. Fathers’ support can influence mothers’
breastfeeding decisions and behavior. Potentially supportive behaviors have been
reported in previous studies, but no studies have directly examined which, if
any, of those actions are actually more likely to result in desired
breastfeeding outcomes. The two studies reported in this paper address this gap
by examining relationships between fathers’ reported breastfeeding support and
mothers’ perceptions of received support and breastfeeding intentions,
satisfaction, and duration. The Partner Breastfeeding Influence Scale (PBIS) was
used in an online survey with 64 women and 41 men (34 couples) and a telephone
survey with 80 mothers and 65 fathers (63 couples). Fathers’ and mothers’
reports of how often fathers engage in the types of support measured by the PBIS
were used to predict breastfeeding intentions, satisfaction, and duration. In
Study 1, responsiveness predicted breastfeeding success and satisfaction for men
and satisfaction for women. However, mothers’ intended breastfeeding duration
was shorter when fathers both wanted them to breastfeed for a long time and were
more appreciative and savvy about breastfeeding. Study 2 showed that the best
breastfeeding support is given when a considerate, well-organized teamwork
approach is used that is sensitive to the requirements of the mother. Keyword:
Breastfeeding, Family, Role, Support, Successfully
