Title: Country Differences in Nocturnal Sleep Variability: Observations from a Large-scale, Long-term Sleep Wearable Study
Authors: Adrian R. Willoughby, Iman Alikhani, Mari Karsikas, Xin Yu Chua, Michael W.L. Chee
ID: openalex.W4377140162
URL: https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/8ahsu

Sleep duration, timing and consistency are all important for maintaining good
physical health and psychological functioning. While differences in sleep
duration across countries are well-known, fewer large-scale studies
characterising differences in sleep variability and differences between weekday
and weekend sleep have been conducted. The goal of this study was, therefore, to
capitalize on the increased use of wearable technology to characterise nocturnal
sleep, weekday sleep variability and changes in sleep patterns at the weekend in
a large, globally diverse sample. Using data from over 50 million night’s sleep,
sleep measures for ~220,000 wearable device users from 35 countries were
calculated. Multiple regression was used to assess the impact country of
residence had on a number of sleep measures including sleep duration, sleep
variability, weekend sleep extension and social jet lag. Our results support
prior findings that nocturnal sleep duration and sleep efficiency are lower in
Asia than other regions. Furthermore, weekend sleep extension is longer in
Europe and the USA than in Asia, and is only partially related to shorter
weekday sleep duration. There are also cross-country differences in social
jetlag although the regional differences are less distinct than for weekend
sleep extension. Variability in weekday sleep duration also tends to be greater
in Asia than other regions. Our results suggest that culture affects not only
sleep duration and timing, but also how sleep is modulated over the course of
the week. While sleep is influenced by many factors, we hypothesize that
differing work cultures may be one contributory factor in explaining why sleep
patterns differ in different countries.
