Title: Representations of age and ageing in comedy film
Authors: Margaret Gatling
ID: openalex.W1262715435
URL: 

Ageism is a social injustice that impacts negatively every person who lives long
enough. The aim of this thesis is to raise critical awareness of ageist messages
in the representations of older people on-screen in the popular genre of comedy
film. It has been generally acknowledged that society is influenced, often
unknowingly, by the mass media. Film, particularly comedy film, is a popular
entertainment medium that is readily-accessible, both in cinemas and in DVD/Blu
ray format. Going to the cinema, downloading a film or renting a DVD from a
store are relatively cheap entertainment options for many people in the
developed world. Film, therefore, has the potential to influence large numbers
of viewers. Many films carry ageist messages, which are often undetected and
unrecognised by audiences, yet these messages influence attitudes, behaviours
and opinions. Negative representations of ageing occur in films made for
children as well as those made for adults, which is even more unacceptable
because children are particularly susceptible to influence, and can develop
inaccurate views about age and ageing that may persist throughout their lives.
As a registered nurse I have an obligation to adhere to professional standards
requiring me, and every nurse, to respect and promote the human rights of all
members of society. Discrimination against clients on any grounds, including
age, is unacceptable and contrary to the codes of practice and ethical standards
that govern and guide the profession. Unfortunately, it has been shown that
health professionals, including nurses, are not immune to developing ageist
views. This can negatively affect the care given to older clients and can
contribute to poor physical and mental health outcomes. A dispositive analysis
approach to critical discourse analysis was used to investigate the ways age and
ageing are represented in a selection of comedy films. Dispositive analysis
includes analysis of actions and objects related to the topic under scrutiny as
well as analysis of the language used. This approach is extremely useful when
examining representations of age and ageing in film because not all aspects of
the discourse are linguistic. An example of this is the following scenario: a
car is seen weaving erratically along the road with just the top of the driver's
old-fashioned hat visible through the front windscreen. It is commonly assumed
that the driver is an elderly woman; no linguistic signposting is required.
Comedy, as a genre, was chosen because of its capacity to perpetuate ideas and
representations that, in other contexts, would be unacceptable but, using the
guise of humour, are rendered permissible. Highly-exaggerated and ridiculous
situations and characterisations are expected in comedy films; harmful messages,
therefore, about gender, race, sexual orientation, religion and age can be
disseminated freely. Were such scenes and messages to be aired in the real
world, repercussions might well occur in the form of public protest and legal
action. This thesis considers a selected corpus of films in three categories: 1.
films about mid-life and the concept of mid-life crisis 2. films concerning
older people's age and ageing 3. films related to older people's sexuality.
Films that featured aspects of middle age as well as old age were considered
because middle age is identified as the time in the life span when ageing
becomes a subject that attracts the attention of the comedy filmmakers. The
films in the dataset were chosen on the basis of their audience reach and
popularity and content, which had to contain material related to themes of age
and ageing. Findings confirmed that middle age is largely represented as a time
of crisis, particularly for men. Analysis showed middle age to be characterised
by stereotypical behaviours related to disappointment and dissatisfaction,
including infidelity, restlessness, yearning for change, risk taking and
attempts to 'turn back the clock' by cosmetic enhancements. Representations of
old age in recent comedy films were found to be much more diverse than those
found in earlier manifestations. Tentative steps appear to have been taken
towards a more realistic portrayal of old age, particularly in relation to
sexuality. Representations of old age as a period of asexuality appear to be
fading to be replaced with a discourse of ageing which includes older people who
have some level of sexual activity or, at least, an interest in sexuality. The
myth of a heteronormative old age is being challenged by the emergence of older
characters that are openly gay. The thesis concludes with a discussion about
strategies that could be used to raise critical awareness about the messages
disseminated in film. Specific strategies for use in the education of health
professionals could reduce ageism in the future workforce of this vital sector
of the community. Critical thinking skills could be sharpened by giving students
the opportunity to evaluate representations of older people in film. Students
could reflect on their own attitudes to ageing and consider how their practice
could be improved by embracing an open-minded, non-judgemental approach to the
care of all clients, irrespective of age.
