Title: Understanding Access to Learning Opportunities in Collaborative Projects: Gendered Social Hierarchies in Student Teams
Authors: Trevion Henderson
ID: openalex.W4384303372
URL: https://doi.org/10.21061/see.101

Background: Prior research has demonstrated that participation in authentic
learning experiences that resemble real-world engineering practice is key to
unlocking the benefits of collaborative projects, such as design projects, for
students in engineering. However, research has also documented that women are
less likely to participate in key learning experiences in engineering design
education, undermining the goals of project-based learning. Purpose/Hypothesis:
The purpose of this research study was to understand how social power dynamics
shape the types of tasks allocated to students in teams and, by extension,
students learning in collaborative engineering design projects. Drawing on the
Model of Inequitable Task Allocation in Project-Based Learning, this work
examines the role of prior experiences and skills, self-efficacy, and
students&rsquo; motivation in the process by which design tasks allocation is
negotiated in student teams. Design/Method: This ethnographic study entailed
three data collection strategies: (a) ongoing observations of three focal design
teams in a cornerstone design course, (b) one-on-one, semi-structured interviews
with focal design team members, and (c) reflections from peer mentors who worked
with focal and non-focal teams. Results: Students reflected on their prior
experiences and skills, and the confidence they gained or lacked as a result,
when negotiating their roles in their teams. Importantly, students&rsquo;
valuation of their skills was gendered, where masculinized notions of
engineering skills might lead women to underreport their skills during the role-
negotiation process. Finally, while gendered patterns of marginalization and
exclusion were apparent, I discuss the strategies women employed to exert
influence over their team dynamics. Conclusions: Ensuring equitable
participation in collaborative projects is key to support learning for all
students in collaborative projects. Understanding how students negotiate their
roles and learning opportunities is an important step in supporting
students&rsquo; learning in collaborative projects.
