Title: A Study on Chinese Audience’s Receptive Behavior towards Chinese and Western Cultural Hybridity Films Based on Grounded Theory—Taking Disney’s Animated Film Turning Red as an Example
Authors: Rui Chen, Yi Liu
ID: openalex.W4319298005
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/bs13020135

For a long time, Chinese audiences have not had a high opinion of hybrid Chinese
and Western movies. However, the unanimous praise for <i>Turning Red</i> in
China se ems to have reversed this situation. In order to verify whether the
attitudinal behavior of Chinese audiences toward the film's hybridization of
Chinese and Western cultures has changed, this study collected textual materials
reflecting the Chinese audience's receptive attitudes toward the film: Douban
reviews, short reviews, questionnaires and Mtime.com reviews. Through a grounded
study of 664,312 words, a total of 16 initial categories and four main
categories were obtained. Finally, a cognitive-emotional-attitudinal mechanism
model was formed to explain the audience's receptive behavior process. The study
found that Chinese audiences' positive reception of <i>Turning Red</i> comes
more from the fact that the film touches on personal emotions and focuses on a
series of issues such as growing up, family, and gender, with intergenerational
conflict as the core. The audience achieves self-projection and empathy while
watching the film, rather than recognizing the Chinese culture presented
therein. On this basis, the research further found that the internal structure
of the current cultural hybridity has not changed greatly. The reason audiences
do not give a high evaluation of cultural hybridity films lies in the lack of
conscious distinction between the hybridity culture and the local culture. At
the same time, in terms of cross-cultural creation, we should abandon the blind
pursuit of cultural symbols, take root in cultural soil and then pay attention
to more specific problems. This study reveals that the key factor affecting the
audience's receptive behavior toward cultural hybridity films is not necessarily
the performance of local culture, which is of great significance for
establishing new evaluation criteria.
