Title: Muppets take Windows 95: The queer failure of <i>Muppets Inside: CD‐ROM</i>
Authors: Laura M. Coby
ID: openalex.W4385200836
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jacc.13482

In 2020, communities across the globe had to reimagine what interpersonal
connection, communication, and intimacy could look like. With widespread
lockdowns, self-isolation, and social distancing, there was a push to adopt
previously unfamiliar technologies to usher in alternative ways of being
together. Perhaps the most notable addition to our digital repertoire in the
United States was the addition of Zoom into many people's everyday lives. From
work meetings performed at the kitchen table to impromptu happy hours among
friends, this video calling app became the latest standard of how people
interact when unable to meet in person. In 2020, the Muppets Studio created a
new television show, Muppets Now (Barretta, Thatcher, and Alender, 2020), that
sheds humorous light on the mishaps and collaborative possibilities of Zoom.
This six-episode series, which premiered on the streaming service Disney+,
demonstrates the failure of a computer's operating system. It is set on a
computer screen covered in unclosable pop-ups with unexpected video calls
regularly disrupting the flow of the show. This is not the first time the
Muppets have staged a technological infiltration of the audience's computer or
television; Muppets Now harkens back to the innovative computerized aesthetics
of the 1996 PC game Muppets Inside: CD-ROM (Starwave, 1996). Muppets Inside's
format was a timely commentary on the rise of technology, especially during the
height of CD-ROM gaming, just a few years before the internet became
popularized. The game was made exclusively for Windows 95, which was the state-
of-the-art operating system at the time. Muppets Inside writer Craig Shemin
noted in an interview that most of the team working on Muppets Inside had never
even used this updated Windows software when they began creating the game
(Shemin 2014). Poking fun at the glitches that come with new technology, Muppets
Inside's premise revolves around the failure of the game itself. As soon as the
game boots up, it short-circuits. The player bands together with the Muppets to
fix the game, figuring out how to come together in community when things do not
go to plan. In this essay, I draw lines between the shared approach of
technological failure and communal collaboration within Muppets Inside and
Muppets Now. In particular, I analyze Muppets Inside to demonstrate how the
radical community, queerness, and failure of this 1996 game might help us
reimagine interpersonal connection in the present. By blurring the line between
the digital world of the Muppets and the viewer or player, one can be
transported into a world where normative expectations do not apply, and the
endless potentiality of hope can be dreamt up through play, absurdity, and
chaos. Muppets Inside is predicated on the failure of technology and how we
might forge new ways forward. While the gameplay takes place within the
minigames, these minigames are not connected to the premise of the game:
repairing the player's buggy computer. The minigames, however, are standalone
games based around individual Muppet characters and referencing popular
videogames of the era. Through the exploration of these characters' defining
qualities, the player becomes acquainted with the quirks of these
characters—allowing the player to feel a closeness with the characters as the
game's journey to fix the glitches unfolds. Borrowing from the computerized
aesthetics of Muppets Inside, Muppets Now takes a deep dive into the tumult of
technology. The Disney+ series based its format off the introduction and
necessity of Zoom into our daily lives during the COVID-19 pandemic; they took
short video segments and set them in a dizzying computer landscape with video
calls, notifications, and email messages that referenced newly popularized
technology. Originally slotted as a series of disparate 10-min shorts, Muppets
Now pivoted to a half-hour format to better accommodate social distancing
protocols at the beginning of the pandemic. This approach allowed performers to
record their individual segments remotely, so they could follow the health and
safety regulations of the time (Puppet Nerd 2020). Muppets Now acknowledges this
unique filming situation in the end credits of each episode: “To those who
graciously stayed quiet, lending us their homes, offices, bedrooms, toys,
possessions, and support.” During this time of worldwide crisis, communities
needed to explore new ways of being together, to find humor amidst the grief,
and in their own way, the Muppets helped demonstrate alternative ways of
connection. Muppets Now and Muppets Inside grapple with the chaos of the digital
landscape through a culmination of clips that comprise the final product,
referencing the variety show format of The Muppet Show. Though these pieces of
media were created in dramatically different times, they both allow the audience
to engage in a collective reimagining of the world and what community can look
like. In addition to the refashioning of The Muppet Show's variety show form, in
Muppets Inside, pre-existing content from The Muppet Show found a new purpose,
as clips from the show were sprinkled throughout the game. This inclusion of The
Muppet Show into this CD-ROM breathed new life into The Muppet Show video
archive, one that could not have been anticipated during the original taping of
the show. The reformulation of these aesthetics can be described as “queer use.”
In What's the Use?: On the Uses of Use, Sara Ahmed theorizes that queer use is
when something is useful in a way that does not directly correlate with its
intended purpose; it is potentiality put into motion. Ahmed (2019, 218), drawing
from queer theorists José Esteban Muñoz and Jack Halberstam, writes: “Queer use
[is] finding a use for what has been designated not much use, finding that a
potential has not been exhausted.” Because something has been deemed not useful
or useless, it must forge unique, non-normative ways of being in the world. Even
though the clips from The Muppet Show were not intended to be gamified though an
interactive CD-ROM, the archive was able to gain a new purpose through Muppets
Inside. Similar to the queer use of the archived TV clips, Muppets Inside's
premise of technological failure was able to find new life in Muppets Now. Soon
after Muppets Inside was released, Starwave transitioned from creating
entertainment CD-ROMs to focusing on internet production. As a result,
production of Muppets Inside was cut short by 1998, the year Starwave was
acquired by the Walt Disney Company. Because of the game's limited production
run and the eventual obsoletion of CD-ROMs all together, Muppets Inside was no
longer useful in the traditional sense. Few people could get their hands on the
game, and with the rising success of internet gaming, few opted to play a CD-ROM
game. Despite these limitations, Muppets Inside found alternative modes of
persisting in the form of Muppets Now. This 2020 series is a queer use of the
aesthetics of failed technology shown in Muppets Inside. Not only does Muppets
Now resurface the theme of computerized mishaps in to form of pop-ups, video
calls, and error messages, it also adopts the silly yet radical means of dealing
with newfound technology from Muppets Inside. Referencing back to Muppets Inside
was not an obvious choice for the Disney's Muppets Now, as the Muppets'
relationship with Disney has been nonlinear and tumultuous. After the poor
reviews of the Jim Henson Hour in the late 1980s and early 1990s, Henson wanted
to breathe new life into the company. He entertained the offer by Walt Disney
Company's CEO at the time, Michael Eisner, to sell the Jim Henson Company to
Disney. However, during this drawn-out exchange, Eisner persisted that the terms
of the sale expand to also include Sesame Street. The interminable duration of
negotiations with Disney exhausted Henson and, with took a on the was able to be
Henson from While the the in the of the Jim Henson it negotiations of the
company. It was not that the Walt Disney Company acquired the the production
Muppets This to Disney was not a it Disney's or the Muppet and The Muppets not
into the Disney their that a the time of Disney's of the the Jim Henson Company
had and series in the of which Disney has Disney's production of Muppet content
has been in to the at which the Jim Henson Company was to Disney's of the
Muppets have at the of the Muppets to a as The Muppet Show Jim and one of the
original Muppet a between Jim Henson and Disney that Disney's of the Muppets has
of the This of the Muppets can be in as and a and as the The Muppets on the most
normative Muppet to However, in 2020, Disney took a at of the aesthetics from
the game Muppets Inside to Muppets Now. In this essay, I explore how the game
Muppets Inside a radical of queer Muppets Inside's approach to chaos and
community as a in the as to alternative ways of being together in to of “queer
and I into failure as a queer of Through this I explore how one can with the and
the within the Muppets and by of dealing with the one is better to and within
their own lives. I how the failure of the player's computer system in this game
for the Muppets and the player to together in to a system that has been and
aesthetics of chaos and failure are in the of queer of I to and queer in Muppets
Inside. In The and of that the is not and people who do not feel the of
normative and we must and better ways of being in the and new of what might be
or useful by Muppets Inside the player to engage in play and among technological
chaos. The Muppets' the within normative social and the player to what it could
look to a and silly together. Despite Jim as a and work at the to a few the of
the of and Henson described this was not a the and the and being out as being a
and a Henson regularly used television and to into the most everyday and the
within The Muppets use their and to fun at and into and By up this to in the and
the Muppets a of queer both within and of Despite the beginning of the for the
Jim Henson the and together during this to of the most Muppet to In after Jim
Henson took the company. years after Jim Henson the Jim Henson Company premiered
one of its most to The Muppet Despite its the a even the from the as being their
of this In an Muppet that the Jim Henson Company's to The Muppet so soon after
they were all to something that so and Soon after The Muppet in the Jim Henson
Company began work on their Muppet The of this was with a PC game by The year
Muppet and its game Muppets Inside made its Not only these the they were being
on from Muppets Inside were at the of Muppet set up a to the and when the
performers were they come by our and they filming for the for the Muppets Inside
game and This in for the Muppets in the 1990s, was a around the Jim Henson
Company after the of Jim Henson at the beginning of the The with the that and
Muppets Inside became a of this new of the into the game's I for an interview
the and production of Muppets Inside. During our the of creating Muppets Inside
and the collaboration between the Jim Henson Company and a software by where was
the time of Muppets Inside's Starwave had made CD-ROMs for as and from their and
the in that the Muppets CD-ROM a video game of clips, so to and the Muppets to
of the at Starwave were a to a game. was by to the game as of a video game, the
of Muppets Inside through during the with Starwave the in a few 2020). In the
Muppets Inside was of In addition to the of Muppets Inside, clips from The
Muppet Show of the games and up as the player their way across the these clips
as or that on the and are off after the is to the of the game's and As the game
began to the Jim Henson Company to the game and Craig Shemin to the among a of
who on the (Shemin 2014). Through and they the Muppets get in the player's
computer 2020). the game's that the game be to as as He the it be to to the we a
game that was and who have of the Muppets' TV computer and computer It is that
through collaboration with made it through to even the of the game Muppets
Inside, the a computer was created by the This between and and Muppets Inside's
place among Muppet the line between Sesame and Muppets Inside the player's so as
to the player's and it into the game the player to their of technology, and The
Muppets' approach to chaos can be found within the introduction to the game.
Because of the from the CD-ROM, the game could not a 2020). This became the for
one of the most in Muppets Inside: the of the player's screen into the game
itself. Though there was that might their computer or was with a the not this
2020). It that most with the game through its when it to the not only does the
player this of they the Muppets to help them However, the Muppets' through a
situation does not to a at the end of a Muppets game, or In most of the in the
Muppets' repertoire in The player with this of to fix the Muppets' game and the
player's computer. a of community between the player and the the player to the
between the world of the Muppets and their By the player to of what can or look
Muppets Inside alternative ways of being in the that and chaos. The premise of
Muppets Inside the player to engage with the that a technological and what
shared the player find within the that the Muppets of how might in the world by
queer of their the Muppets are this essay, in the of queer and queer of I queer
as a of and that of and the and of of to and the line between the and the which
have been as a means of and As in The be to the where and social are As a to of
for a queer that and be from the of the lines in are to and lines of and of as
of and and of when the of of made be to of different yet I them all to and to to
normative From the Muppets' and to their they what is Even among the there is no
way of or social on and community that from what might be deemed from a
normative Through Muppets Inside's queer and it the of the Muppets and for how
to approach chaos in our own lives. the of the Muppets' and the of The Muppet I
find it useful to look at this work through the of to the gameplay of Muppets
Inside and how it to a approach of with the how might play out allow the viewer
to within the Muppets' or in the In The of the that the of does not within the
of the of the of the it yet in of an the audience to the within their own lives.
The Muppets do not that chaos can be by that they in with one as by the of
characters within the have a show in the Muppet they the to their just as much
as they the from a The chaos of the Muppets its player to the of everyday up a
for and The however, help the in the that they the Muppets' that the of the to
its of the of the and the of the approach by the of and By a world where the
player of Muppets Inside up to to analyze their own to the that a or a a are and
of the which we Not only do the Muppet characters a with their the of the game a
traditional The introduction to Muppets Inside gameplay by the the between the
player and the and the player to the game and their own computer. Muppets Inside
as what to be a the player's Soon after a of the and of The Muppet Show Muppet
the theme from the The Muppet Show However, the theme has been with computer and
time to the time to time to meet the Muppets on the Muppets into the the screen
and the Muppet out from the this all the player can is their own screen with and
they had to the game. From the player's it the game has out to software However,
the Muppets' can be as they to what the technological might the to out what with
the game. In the that the player to the and the from the the of a computer After
to a and by and that they are and to a series of and a Muppet from the the and
of Muppets CD-ROM has been into pieces how I latest to into and in the and, of
and to into the player's This in the of the computer the player in the and of
the player's computer. and the player, as the and the game traditional computer
games the player one to be able to the However, Muppets Inside's gameplay is In
this CD-ROM, the minigames do not to the of the game. The player bands together
with and in an to help the game from the by the the was the only Muppet who was
not into the computer when the game so is with to fix the game and get the
Muppets out of the player's computer from the In one of the video cut our CD-ROM
up, it the games and the video clips and all the of the and up the to have to
find our games and play them all the way the only way to the While the player,
and play the minigames, is working on to the Muppets from the computer. the
player a of minigames, they are to a different in the computer to find Muppets
that have been during the of the game. This is shown through computer and video
clips of the The minigames however, have to do with this journey throughout the
player's computer. By all the minigames, the player the from the game. In
addition to the from Muppets Inside, the minigames community between player and
the of the minigames demonstrate how the Muppets normative modes of being by the
player with the This PC game of minigames which must all be to the to get the
computer in working all these games are a on something the player is that be a
video game, a from The Muppet or a to the technology they are the game Muppets
Inside the player to reimagine its relationship with technology and media by
technology and games they might into the Muppet is a game to in which the player
a to a and to with their In the player clips from to put them in As most of
these in of failed where the for and takes the of The Muppet and them to them
This is a where the player to an and when the are it clips from The Muppet Show.
game, on the the The player must from with on The player on and as way across
the the being and by the for a that which In this game, or by a or the for the
player to a as or of is a on video game However, in this the player as the in a
kitchen and Muppet of is an game that the player to out of a at a through as a
or a on a as with there must be an of to so does all a of as on the By to the
Muppets throughout the Muppets Inside minigames, the player a of closeness with
these This of community the player to put their in these characters as they work
together to fix the CD-ROM and the Muppets from the computer's the of the game,
Muppets Inside community and shared between the player and the Muppet of the in
the game is that the player must Muppet characters from within the computer. the
to be in the screen of screen an that the of all the clips and characters the
player has the way From that the of the being the first of Muppets to the the
the Muppets that the player, is on the of the the Muppets for this community
among the player and the the player first the the Muppet the the end of the
game. In The of for the of made through these that the with and While these get
the normative of from these pieces of media a radical form of around queer and
and the of the out this with what terms a that in found and queer He not in
offer ways of being in the these or we can the shared social and that we in the
when we with a and in As we the between and and we the of of the or what theme
at the of the that it was of and it through with the is a of what the Muppets so
and time with the Muppets and in their a of closeness between the player and the
Muppets that might help the player better what at the of each a look into one of
the minigames, in of the game takes place all on one with a and a the The and on
each time one the game. of this game a with a its and Muppets in a and a and
which are in the game. The player the and with which to from a at a on the do
the player the on the and the up and to at the and all the that are in the
player through the and a of across the put on a and back into the the player
through the the to a video of The Muppet Show where is one of across the and a
from the While do not help the player's computer get this the player most The
player to by play that as one of most in Because the player they in failure and
The player a connection with as their are in this the minigames, of yet ways of
up for one and community chaos. After the player has all the minigames, our for
the duration of the game, that all the within the computer are and can get the
Muppets out of the computer. the Muppets' as the failed from the beginning of
the After the theme an for chaos and in the Muppet up the game with one of In a
final of community, one of the theme time to end our made a hope to the most
play The Muppet lines of community and I look to of to analyze Muppets Inside's
collective together and Muñoz theorizes as of the and and an on potentiality or
for While go and to and that can be through the The Muppets' through not only
their radical of community also in their failure to into normative By up this to
in the and the Muppets for and queer a of both within and of The Muppets with
the around the Muppet the silly of The Muppet Show's to get up by a with failed
and so many of However, these not be a theorizes failure as way of being in the
as a on the to success of a of at an of in to these does not that this is and
around the queer made through The of within the Muppets so much of their in the
silly and the out the and the Through the Muppets' failure to into normative
their failure becomes and the Muppets' queer failure is from their However, this
does not failure to is the hope when with the hope of a better throughout of the
their and might we to the queer of the to this I to In this Ahmed that how one
in the in to or the might be an of In a through the of the COVID-19 it has to
new ways of dealing with the from Muppets Inside and Muppets Now, how might we
new ways of being together, even when It might be to a however, what might we a
queer that and of play, and might in our queerness, the of by social and I not
that of queer community is a out of the I for the of our these calling for a
reimagining of collective that might us of the By approach to we a into
something that where alternative modes of being not only are in queer From the
communal of a computerized and software to the of what a television show could
look during a health crisis, to the of a community of after the of their and the
Muppets find a way to come together for the of each This to what we one as a to
the of social and us to Jim and Muppet Show of how the Muppets each and the
world around they us in a hope Jim Henson much and between the and the as Muppet
we might be able to how to alternative and in be to not the and humorous that
Jim Henson is a in the of at the of with a in and queer The of how for the to
the through
