Title: From the Queen's English to reclaiming indigenous languages: An African poetic perspective
Authors: Yetunde K. Quadri, G. Sue Kasun
ID: openalex.W4375840894
URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/tesj.723

Indigenous languages are becoming endangered and extinct as a result of over 500
years of colonization (Pennycook & Makoni, 2020). Over half of indigenous
languages were already lost by 1920, and up to 90% of languages will be extinct
within 100 years (Language Conservancy, 2022). This loss is not just an academic
or linguistic one, but one that carries certain kinds of knowledge that are best
expressed through the concepts and language patterns inherent in the native
vernaculars. Due to the confluence of modernity, mass media, and Great Britain's
enormous historic influence, English became the most exported language of power
and remains such today. It creates a vast field of language professionals who
continue to export this language with varying degrees of critical awareness
about its impact on the peoples who learn this language. For some, it is an
uncritical and simple sharing of symbols through words and meaning; for others,
it is a reflexive process of navigating tensions of respecting and celebrating
local cultures while engaging the colonial power's language toward
decolonization (e.g., Motha, 2014; Grant et al., 2021). The field of TESOL's
practitioners have much reflection to do as they teach this colonial language.
Will they use it for further means of oppression, or will they find ways to use
it for more subversive purposes that might help sustain cultures (e.g., Alim &
Paris, 2017; McCarty & Lee, 2014) and decolonize oppressive structures of power?
We center decoloniality as the guiding frame of this poetic inquiry.
Decoloniality is a mode of thinking and inquiring toward the ends of undoing the
oppression of colonialism and creating a new imaginary. This “new imaginary” can
be the fruit of conversation and visioning of those who have survived
colonization, a vision in which new forms of peace and coexistence can occur
(Pérez, 1999). Such a new imaginary is also the new world, such as the one
created by the Zapatistas in Chiapas, Mexico, building “a world where many
worlds fit” (Enlace Zapatista, 2018; Hidalgo Aviles & Kasun, 2019; Kasun et al.,
2020). It can also mean the return of land to the indigenous peoples uprooted
from their space and place by the violence of colonization (Tuck & Yang, 2012).
Countries that have become independent from their colonizers still need to
decolonize their education to promote their indigenous languages, an effort
presently being undertaken with varying successes in countries as distant as
Bolivia and South Africa (Chandler, 2021; Hornberger, 2009, 2020; McCarty & Lee,
2014). The contribution we offer here is a personal reflection of the first
author, a bilingual doctoral student from Nigeria, teacher of multilingual
learners, and an immigrant to the United States. Exploring her positioning as a
knower of African knowledges and languages, she crafted the poem that follows
for a doctoral seminar on writing and language conducted by the second author.
The poem was the first author's effort to demonstrate the influence of that
course's learning on her research and scholarship. The course was designed to
help decolonize students’ conceptions of writing and language. The co-authors
worked together on the piece and offer both the poetry and this
contextualization as a call for a more inclusive practice and acceptance of all
language usage. Skutnabb-Kangas (2009) asked, “What can TESOL do in order not to
participate in crimes against humanity?” We invite the reader to consider how in
the field of TESOL they can help subvert these systems of power toward anti-
oppressive, decolonial instruction. Borrowing from the framing of decoloniality,
we look into theories of translanguaging which are congruent with the
decolonial, which allow speakers of multiple languages to engage their full
linguistic and identic repertoires in representing their identities through
speech, writing, and conveying meaning (Wei, 2017). Such practice transgresses
colonial notions of language use, which have separated languages as if they were
totally and completely different systems and not to be mixed or, even worse,
“confused” when used simultaneously. At the same time, we nod to the critical
and urgent work of scholars who have foregrounded the racialization of the other
in the burgeoning field of raciolinguistics, which correctly names how some
languages and language uses are proxies for the racialization of Black, Brown,
and Other peoples who are not White (Flores & Rosa, 2015). In practice, this is
enacted when, for instance, monolingual White people look disparagingly at
Mexican-origin Spanish speakers in U.S. grocery stores engaging their mother
tongue(s). Such dirty looks, among other macro and micro-aggressions against the
race of those considered somehow inferior, often make people feel ashamed of
their mother tongues, and thus losing them toward the majoritarian and
colonizing language(s) of the dominant country. We want to be clear and point
out that such negative reaction to and racialization of White people's languages
seldom happens. We look to South Africa, Belize, and India as examples. We now
turn to the specific context of Nigeria, the country about which the first
author offers her poetic reflection. Languages are closely linked with identity,
knowledge systems, and membership in a community, and therefore foundational for
the survival of the community (Hanemann, 2020). English is the official language
in Nigeria as a residue of colonization Great Britain. We note the irony of
forcing Black people to speak the White man's language still, today. At the same
time, we are sensitive to the reality that English literally affords access to
money, employment, and digital knowledge—that both celebrating and condemning
its circulation are activities that merit reflection (Motha, 2014). Indeed, the
first author's immigration and the nature of her work in the United States would
not have been possible without the acquisition of English, thereby bestowing a
kind of wealth and empowerment upon her (Abrar-ul-Hassan, 2021). Leveraging her
linguistic capital, the first author has access to the economic and language
resources in English and uses these resources during instruction with her
students. However, in addition to knowing the power and prestige that one
derives from the English language as a nonnative speaker, she realizes the
importance of indigenous languages as an asset and continues to encourage her
students to speak their native languages as they acquire English. Research has
revealed that being bilingual or multilingual is not harmful to children's
cognitive and linguistic development. Rather, children who speak more than one
language are more capable of multitasking and have higher metalinguistic
awareness (Barac & Bialystok, 2011; Ben-Zeev, 1977; Cummins, 1978). Despite this
increasing awareness about the benefits of multilingualism, indigenous languages
are not generally encouraged in official Nigerian (and most other countries')
schools, and are referred to as “dialects,” as if they were somehow less than
other legitimate languages. As observed by Degawan (2019), these languages are
“accorded less importance than national languages, contributing to their
eventual loss” (p. 7). Due to the prestige conferred on English, parents choose
to communicate with their children in the dominant languages, relinquishing the
speaking of mother tongues to older people, generations of “the past.” In this
way, the next generation is unable to communicate with their grandparents and
other custodians of the language or access the wisdom the language carries. This
results in the loss of language, culture, and wisdom which could be passed from
one generation to the other. This cycle of language loss is exemplified in the
first author's language journey which follows. Even, I am guilty …During my
teaching practice at a secondary school in Ile-Ife …Two students were fighting
…I asked what happened …They tried to tell me in English …The boys struggled and
searched for the words …When they couldn't express themselves in English …They
combined the little English and Ife dialect which is their mother tongue …The
students switched from one language to another …From dialect to dialect … I
laughed at them …In my mind, I didn't think they stood a chance …“They can't
speak English”. “They are speaking broken English”. “They are local people”. I
had no knowledge of codeswitching or translanguaging …I didn't know African
Americans had Black English …Their language of communication among their own …Or
Spanglish varieties by the Spanish-speaking community …What is wrong with
Nigerian English? Or pidgin English as some call it? Our own version of English
… I had no idea I could have helped those students …By using their mother tongue
as a bridge to their learning …I could have encouraged them …Instead of laughing
at them …Instead of writing them off …Making them ashamed of their identity
…Thinking success is all about speaking Queen's English … As an adult, living in
the United States now …I understand perfectly …There are times I search for
words …To describe what I feel or have to say …I have it in Yoruba my mother
tongue …But I cannot find the right word or expression in English …I can use
both English and Yoruba to convey the thoughts …But how many people can I reach
with that? My son speaks Yoruba like a toddler learning a new language …Our
people laugh at speakers like him …But the shame is ours …Our Nigerian society
does not encourage our children …Either home in Nigeria or abroad …Our language
is not good enough …The English language is the best …If you could add any of
the Western accents …You are the envy of everyone …Everyone wants to be your
friend …They mimic the accent …Not caring if you are truly communicating! As a
teacher of multilingual learners in the state of Georgia …I encounter teachers
who elevate the English language over all other languages …These teachers tell
students not to speak their native language …Claiming the native language
interferes with learning the English language …They tell parents not to speak
their language to their children …They make parents feel inferior because they
can't speak English …The parents are disconnected from school since they don't
understand the language …“You must speak only English”. As if knowing or
speaking English is all you need to succeed … If that was the case …All native
speakers should be highflyers …It is time for the truth …Multilingual learners
have an advantage …We have stories to tell that people read in books or
newspapers …We have different perspectives to bring to the conversation …We add
to what is on the ground, we are no liability! Unfortunately, I am guilty of the
same sin as my parents …They never taught me to speak the Owo dialect …Because
they wouldn't speak it to us …I heard them talk to each other …I could
understand some of it …But I never spoke the language except to make jest of it
…I only spoke in Yoruba …Then, I got married …And continuing the cycle, I spoke
Yoruba to my spouse …But speaking only English to my children …The English
language got reinforced in their schools …As they must even be better
accomplished than I am … Then my family moved to the United States …My children
lost access to hearing Yoruba in the community …We live with people from
different countries …They have no way of learning the Yoruba language …They
speak English very well now …With the American accent as I wanted …But what
about my own language? They hear, they understand bits here and there …They do
not understand a lot … Now I realize the value of my language …But is it too
late to undo the damage? My daughter is trying to speak Yoruba …She is learning
by watching Nigerian movies …She begs me to speak Yoruba to her …She tries to
converse with me in Yoruba …She struggles to find words in Yoruba …I struggle to
find words in English What an irony of life! The language journey presented here
is one of both loss and reclamation. The individuals from the first author's
life who were losing their heritage Nigerian languages and grappling with
English are exemplars of millions, if not billions, engaging in the same
language and identity confluences as English is imposed and taught. Both authors
recognize that we have, at times, further exported English as a colonizer
linguistically and culturally, but we both also know better now and do better.
From a decolonial vantage point, we recognize the importance of honoring
language diversity, as it promotes positive identity and development through the
speakers’ literacy practices (e.g., Gomez & Lewis, 2022; McCarty & Lee, 2014).
“Standard” English privileges specific discourses that place students with
nondominant racial backgrounds, perspectives, and languages as “other;” they are
thus also (mis)understood as deficient, particularly when the students are
racialized as anything other than White (Flores & Rosa, 2015; Gutiérrez &
Orellana, 2006). Bilingual and multilingual learners have skills and resources
that can be utilized to create more equitable classrooms while centering their
linguistic and cultural identities (Cummins, 2019; Norton, 2013). These efforts
can help untangle prior harm of the conquest of culture that was achieved
through the instruction of English and its transmission of values such as
consumerism, patriarchy, individualism, and domination (hooks, 1994). An obvious
step, of course, is centering multicultural texts which foreground students'
identities; examples of such texts include The Name Jar (Choi, 2001) and Alma
and How She Got Her Name (Martinez-Neal, 2018) for students at all levels. More
importantly, crafting curriculum that foregrounds who students are through
immigration, survival, history, and inventions is a key step in identity
recognition. Students' families can be engaged through student interviews,
storytelling, and funds of knowledge to reclaim the loss that has occurred
through much subtractive schooling (Valenzuela, 1999) the world over. Involving
the families sends a strong message to the youth that their cultures and
families have meaningful knowledge to share. While language educators often
correctly worry that technology is moving past those with fewer resources, even
the limited access that the world's majority now possesses can be harnessed for
weaving heritage identity with contemporary technological use. For instance,
students can use cameras for collecting family and cultural moments to share
their stories visually and in words, including in their heritage languages. They
can use multimedia formats and engage each other's work as part of the class
curriculum. They can build networks within and outside their countries using
both English and their heritage languages in these efforts. Schools and
classrooms must maximize bilingual and multilingual learners' connected
repertoires and use their funds of knowledge when teaching and assessing
academic literacies (Moll et al., 1992). Rather than disparage and discourage
bilingual and multilingual learners when they use translanguaging skills (Wei,
2017), educators should encourage them as part of their language journeys and
language identity toolkits. We envision the well-explored terrain of allowing
students to use both or all of their languages at once and encouraging this in
language education, and we know students are empowered through it and can
further their rich language repertoires through such use. The affordance of
translanguaging in the classroom elevates the heritage languages to claim the
space that English never earned on its merits (only becoming so powerful through
colonization and later the phenomenon of globalization). Although more
indigenous languages will surely continue to wither and become extinct, many
languages are still thriving and being revived. As the first author illustrates
in the poem, even in the same generation where there is language loss there are
tools available to help provide indigenous language access. By using only the
colonizers' dominant language to evaluate the language use of bilingual and
multilingual learners, it is impossible to accurately measure the students' full
language and literacy development because their complete set of “cognitive,
linguistic, and experiential tools” (Gomez & Lewis, 2022) across languages are
not being utilized. For policy and language planning, we encourage educators to
consider global efforts at heritage language preservation in countries such as
South Africa, New Zealand, and Bolivia. What might the Global South have to tell
us all in considering how language and identity are central to ways of knowing
and being (e.g., Pennycook & Makoni, 2020)? While we do not demand a strict
sense that all languages remaining must be preserved, surely we can collectively
discuss how and why it matters to accomplish the preservation that can still be
done. At the same time, we recognize English has a practical place as a global
language. What do we want to do as thoughtful, decolonial language educators
about this repositioning of English? When and how can we teach about its less
than glamorous history, and when do we teach about the powers of subversion
through language as a connector through resistance in art, poetry, song, and so
on? We envision a world where, despite the colonially inspired feeling that
languages as separators, we hack their colonial usage as dividers and harness
their power as uniters. Yetunde K. Quadri is a teacher of multilingual students
in an urban public school in Georgia, United States. She is also a doctor of
education student in curriculum and instruction at Georgia State University. Her
primary research interest is in using transformative pedagogies to engage and
motivate students in the classroom. G. Sue Kasun is an associate professor of
language education at Georgia State University where she is also Director of the
Center for Transnational and Multilingual Education. Her research centers ways
of knowing, most recently indigenous ones, and Mexican-origin populations.
