Title: Identity management in the face of HIV and intersecting stigmas: A metasynthesis of qualitative reports from sub-Saharan Africa
Authors: Alanna Bergman, Katherine McNabb, Khaya Mlandu, Alvine Akumbom, Dalmacio Dennis Flores
ID: openalex.W4318765514
URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0000706

While stigma experienced by people living with HIV (PLWH) is well documented,
intersectional stigma and additional stigmatized identities have not received
similar attention. The purpose of this metasynthesis is to identify salient
stigmatized intersections and their impact on health outcomes in PLWH in sub-
Saharan Africa. Using Sandelowski and Barroso's metasynthesis method, we
searched four databases for peer-reviewed qualitative literature. Included
studies (1) explored personal experiences with intersecting stigmas, (2)
included ≥1 element of infectious disease stigma, and (3) were conducted in sub-
Saharan Africa. Our multinational team extracted, aggregated, interpreted, and
synthesized the findings. From 454 screened abstracts, the 34 studies included
in this metasynthesis reported perspectives of at least 1258 participants (282
men, 557 women, and 109 unspecified gender) and key informants. From these
studies, gender and HIV was the most salient stigmatized intersection, with HIV
testing avoidance and HIV-status denial seemingly more common among men to
preserve traditional masculine identity. HIV did not threaten female identity in
the same way with women more willing to test for HIV, but at the risk of
abandonment and withdrawal of financial support. To guard against status loss,
men and women used performative behaviors to highlight positive qualities or
minimize perceived negative attributes. These identity management practices
ultimately shaped health behaviors and outcomes. From this metasynthesis, the
Stigma Identity Framework was devised for framing identity and stigma
management, focusing on role expectation and fulfillment. This framework
illustrates how PLWH create, minimize, or emphasize other identity traits to
safeguard against status loss and discrimination. Providers must acknowledge how
stigmatization disrupts PLWH's ability to fit into social schemas and tailor
care to individuals' unique intersecting identities. Economic security and
safety should be considered in women's HIV care, while highlighting
antiretrovirals' role in preserving strength and virility may improve care
engagement among men.
