Title: A Reference Architecture for Autonomous Networks: An Agent-Based Approach
Authors: Joseph Sifakis, Dongming Li, Hairong Huang, Yong Zhang, Wenshuan Dang, River Huang, Yijun Yu
ID: 2503.12871
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.12871

Abstract:
The vision of autonomous systems is becoming increasingly important in many application areas, where the aim is to replace humans with agents. These include autonomous vehicles and other agents' applications in business processes and problem-solving. For networks, the increasing scale and operation and management (O&M) complexity drive the need for autonomous networks (AN). The technical objective of AN is to ensure trustworthy O&M without human intervention for higher efficiency and lower operating costs. However, realizing AN seems more difficult than autonomous vehicles. It encounters challenges of networks' structural and functional complexity, which operate as distributed dynamic systems governed by various technical and economic constraints. A key problem lies in formulating a rigorous development methodology that facilitates a seamless transition from traditional networks to AN. Central to this methodology is the definition of a reference architecture for network agents, which specifies the required functionalities for their realization, regardless of implementation choices. This article proposes a reference architecture characterizing main functional features, illustrating its application with network use cases. It shows how artificial intelligence components can be used to implement the required functionality and its coordination. The latter is achieved through the management and generation of shared domain-specific knowledge stored in long-term memory, ensuring the overall consistency of decisions and their execution. The article concludes with a discussion of architecture specialization for building network layer agents. It also identifies the main technical challenges ahead, such as satisfying essential requirements at development or runtime, as well as the issue of coordinating agents to achieve collective intelligence in meeting overall network goals.
