Title: MaP-AVR: A Meta-Action Planner for Agents Leveraging Vision Language Models and Retrieval-Augmented Generation
Authors: Zhenglong Guo, Yiming Zhao, Feng Jiang, Heng Jin, Zongbao Feng, Jianbin Zhou, Siyuan Xu
ID: 2512.19453
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.19453

Abstract:
Embodied robotic AI systems designed to manage complex daily tasks rely on a task planner to understand and decompose high-level tasks. While most research focuses on enhancing the task-understanding abilities of LLMs/VLMs through fine-tuning or chain-of-thought prompting, this paper argues that defining the planned skill set is equally crucial. To handle the complexity of daily environments, the skill set should possess a high degree of generalization ability. Empirically, more abstract expressions tend to be more generalizable. Therefore, we propose to abstract the planned result as a set of meta-actions. Each meta-action comprises three components: {move/rotate, end-effector status change, relationship with the environment}. This abstraction replaces human-centric concepts, such as grasping or pushing, with the robot's intrinsic functionalities. As a result, the planned outcomes align seamlessly with the complete range of actions that the robot is capable of performing. Furthermore, to ensure that the LLM/VLM accurately produces the desired meta-action format, we employ the Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) technique, which leverages a database of human-annotated planning demonstrations to facilitate in-context learning. As the system successfully completes more tasks, the database will self-augment to continue supporting diversity. The meta-action set and its integration with RAG are two novel contributions of our planner, denoted as MaP-AVR, the meta-action planner for agents composed of VLM and RAG. To validate its efficacy, we design experiments using GPT-4o as the pre-trained LLM/VLM model and OmniGibson as our robotic platform. Our approach demonstrates promising performance compared to the current state-of-the-art method. Project page: https://map-avr.github.io/.
