Title: Enhancing LLM's Ability to Generate More Repository-Aware Unit Tests Through Precise Contextual Information Injection
Authors: Xin Yin, Chao Ni, Xinrui Li, Liushan Chen, Guojun Ma et al.
ID: 2501.07425
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.07425

Abstract:
Though many learning-based approaches have been proposed for unit test
generation and achieved remarkable performance, they still have limitations in
relying on task-specific datasets. Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) guided
by prompt engineering have gained attention for their ability to handle a broad
range of tasks, including unit test generation. Despite their success, LLMs may
exhibit hallucinations when generating unit tests for focal methods or functions
due to their lack of awareness regarding the project's global context. These
hallucinations may manifest as calls to non-existent methods, as well as
incorrect parameters or return values, such as mismatched parameter types or
numbers. While many studies have explored the role of context, they often
extract fixed patterns of context for different models and focal methods, which
may not be suitable for all generation processes (e.g., excessive irrelevant
context could lead to redundancy, preventing the model from focusing on
essential information). To overcome this limitation, we propose RATester, which
enhances the LLM's ability to generate more repository-aware unit tests through
global contextual information injection. To equip LLMs with global knowledge
similar to that of human testers, we integrate the language server gopls, which
provides essential features (e.g., definition lookup) to assist the LLM. When
RATester encounters an unfamiliar identifier (e.g., an unfamiliar struct name),
it first leverages gopls to fetch relevant definitions and documentation
comments, and then uses this global knowledge to guide the LLM. By utilizing
gopls, RATester enriches the LLM's knowledge of the project's global context,
thereby reducing hallucinations during unit test generation.
