Title: An Empirical Study on the Impact of Code Duplication-aware Refactoring Practices on Quality Metrics
Authors: Eman Abdullah AlOmar
ID: 2502.04073
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.04073

Abstract:
Context: Code refactoring is widely recognized as an essential software
engineering practice that improves the understandability and maintainability of
source code. Several studies attempted to detect refactoring activities through
mining software repositories, allowing one to collect, analyze, and get
actionable data-driven insights about refactoring practices within software
projects. Objective: Our goal is to identify, among the various quality models
presented in the literature, the ones that align with the developer's vision of
eliminating duplicates of code, when they explicitly mention that they refactor
the code to improve them. Method: We extract a corpus of 332 refactoring commits
applied and documented by developers during their daily changes from 128
open-source Java projects. In particular, we extract 32 structural metrics from
which we identify code duplicate removal commits with their corresponding
refactoring operations, as perceived by software engineers. Thereafter, we
empirically analyze the impact of these refactoring operations on a set of
common state-of-the-art design quality metrics. Results: The statistical
analysis of the results obtained shows that (i) some state-of-the-art metrics
are capable of capturing the developer's intention of removing code duplication;
and (ii) some metrics are being more emphasized than others. We confirm that
various structural metrics can effectively represent code duplication, leading
to different impacts on software quality. Some metrics contribute to
improvements, while others may lead to degradation. Conclusion: Most of the
mapped metrics associated with the main quality attributes successfully capture
developers' intentions for removing code duplicates, as is evident from the
commit messages. However, certain metrics do not fully capture these intentions
