Title: Can LLMs Hack Enterprise Networks? Autonomous Assumed Breach Penetration-Testing Active Directory Networks
Authors: Andreas Happe, Jürgen Cito
ID: 2502.04227
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.04227

Abstract:
Enterprise penetration-testing is often limited by high operational costs and
the scarcity of human expertise. This paper investigates the feasibility and
effectiveness of using Large Language Model (LLM)-driven autonomous systems to
address these challenges in real-world Active Directory (AD) enterprise
networks. We introduce a novel prototype designed to employ LLMs to autonomously
perform Assumed Breach penetration-testing against enterprise networks. Our
system represents the first demonstration of a fully autonomous, LLM-driven
framework capable of compromising accounts within a real-life Microsoft Active
Directory testbed, GOAD. We perform our empirical evaluation using five LLMs,
comparing reasoning to non-reasoning models as well as including open-weight
models. Through quantitative and qualitative analysis, incorporating insights
from cybersecurity experts, we demonstrate that autonomous LLMs can effectively
conduct Assumed Breach simulations. Key findings highlight their ability to
dynamically adapt attack strategies, perform inter-context attacks (e.g.,
web-app audits, social engineering, and unstructured data analysis for
credentials), and generate scenario-specific attack parameters like realistic
password candidates. The prototype exhibits robust self-correction mechanisms,
installing missing tools and rectifying invalid command generations. We find
that the associated costs are competitive with, and often significantly lower
than, those incurred by professional human pen-testers, suggesting a path toward
democratizing access to essential security testing for organizations with
budgetary constraints. However, our research also illuminates existing
limitations, including instances of LLM ``going down rabbit holes'', challenges
in comprehensive information transfer between planning and execution modules,
and critical safety concerns that necessitate human oversight.
