Title: The Software Diversity Card: A Framework for Reporting Diversity in Software Projects
Authors: Joan Giner-Miguelez, Sergio Morales, Sergio Cobos, Javier Luis Canovas Izquierdo, Robert Clariso et al.
ID: 2503.05470
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.05470

Abstract:
Context: Interest in diversity in software development has significantly
increased in recent years. Reporting on diversity in software projects can
enhance user trust and assist regulators in evaluating adoption. Recent AI
directives include clauses that mandate diversity information during
development, highlighting the growing interest of public regulators. However,
current documentation often neglects diversity in favor of technical features,
partly due to a lack of tools for its description and annotation. Objectives:
This work introduces the Software Diversity Card, a structured approach for
documenting and sharing diversity-related aspects within software projects. It
aims to profile the various teams involved in software development and
governance, including user groups in testing and software adaptations for
diverse social groups. Methods: We conducted a literature review on diversity
and inclusion in software development and analyzed 1,000 top-starred Open Source
Software (OSS) repositories on GitHub to identify diversity-related information.
Moreover, we present a diversity modeling language, a toolkit for generating
cards using it, and a study of its application in two real-world software
projects. Results: Despite the growing awareness of diversity in the research
community, our analysis found a notable lack of diversity reporting in OSS
projects. Applying the card to real-world examples highlighted challenges such
as balancing anonymity and transparency, managing sensitive data, and ensuring
authenticity. Conclusion: Our proposal can enhance diversity practices in
software development, support public administrations in software assessment, and
help businesses promote diversity as a key asset.
