Title: Statistically Testing Training Data for Unwanted Error Patterns using Rule-Oriented Regression
Authors: Stefan Rass, Martin Dallinger
ID: 2503.18497
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.18497

Abstract:
Artificial intelligence models trained from data can only be as good as the
underlying data is. Biases in training data propagating through to the output of
a machine learning model are a well-documented and well-understood phenomenon,
but the machinery to prevent these undesired effects is much less developed.
Efforts to ensure data is clean during collection, such as using bias-aware
sampling, are most effective when the entity controlling data collection also
trains the AI. In cases where the data is already available, how do we find out
if the data was already manipulated, i.e., ``poisoned'', so that an undesired
behavior would be trained into a machine learning model? This is a challenge
fundamentally different to (just) improving approximation accuracy or
efficiency, and we provide a method to test training data for flaws, to
establish a trustworthy ground-truth for a subsequent training of machine
learning models (of any kind). Unlike the well-studied problem of approximating
data using fuzzy rules that are generated from the data, our method hinges on a
prior definition of rules to happen before seeing the data to be tested.
Therefore, the proposed method can also discover hidden error patterns, which
may also have substantial influence. Our approach extends the abilities of
conventional statistical testing by letting the ``test-condition'' be any
Boolean condition to describe a pattern in the data, whose presence we wish to
determine. The method puts fuzzy inference into a regression model, to get the
best of the two: explainability from fuzzy logic with statistical properties and
diagnostics from the regression, and finally also being applicable to ``small
data'', hence not requiring large datasets as deep learning methods do. We
provide an open source implementation for demonstration and experiments.
