Title: Unveiling Hybrid Cyclomatic Complexity: A Comprehensive Analysis and Evaluation as an Integral Feature in Automatic Defect Prediction Models
Authors: Laura Diana Cernau, Laura Diosan, Camelia Serban
ID: 2504.00477
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.00477

Abstract:
The complex software systems developed nowadays require assessing their quality
and proneness to errors. Reducing code complexity is a never-ending problem,
especially in today's fast pace of software systems development. Therefore, the
industry needs to find a method to determine the qualities of a software system,
the degree of difficulty in developing new functionalities, or the system's
proneness to errors. One way of measuring and predicting the quality attributes
of a software system is to analyse the software metrics values for it and the
relationships between them. More precisely, we should study the metrics that
measure and determine the degree of complexity of the code. This paper aims to
analyse a novel complexity metric, Hybrid Cyclomatic Complexity (HCC) and its
efficiency as a feature in a defect prediction model. The main idea behind this
new metric is that inherited complexity should play a role in the complexity of
a class, hence the need for a metric that calculates the total complexity of a
class, taking into account the complexities of its descendants. Moreover, we
will present a comparative study between the HCC metric and its two components,
the inherited complexity and the actual complexity of a class in the
object-oriented context. Since we want this metric to be as valuable as
possible, the experiments will use data from open-source projects. One of the
conclusions that can be drawn from these experiments is that inherited
complexity is not correlated with class complexity. Therefore, HCC can be
considered a valid metric from this point of view. Moreover, the evaluation of
the efficiency of the prediction models shows us a similar efficiency for HCC
and the inherited complexity. Additionally, there is a need for a clear
distinction between a class's complexity and its inherited complexity when
defining complexity metrics.
