Title: Studying the Impact of Early Test Termination Due to Assertion Failure on Code Coverage and Spectrum-based Fault Localization
Authors: Md. Ashraf Uddin, Shaowei Wang, An Ran Chen,  Tse-Hsun,  Chen et al.
ID: 2504.04557
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.04557

Abstract:
An assertion is commonly used to validate the expected programs behavior (e.g.,
if the returned value of a method equals an expected value) in software testing.
Although it is a recommended practice to use only one assertion in a single test
to avoid code smells (e.g., Assertion Roulette), it is common to have multiple
assertions in a single test. One issue with tests that have multiple assertions
is that when the test fails at an early assertion (not the last one), the test
will terminate at that point, and the remaining testing code will not be
executed. This, in turn, can potentially reduce the code coverage and the
performance of techniques that rely on code coverage information (e.g.,
spectrum-based fault localization). We refer to such a scenario as early test
termination. Understanding the impact of early test termination on test coverage
is important for software testing and debugging, particularly for the techniques
that rely on coverage information obtained from the testing. We conducted the
first empirical study on early test termination due to assertion failure (i.e.,
early test termination) by investigating 207 versions of 6 open-source projects.
We found that a nonnegligible portion of the failed tests (19.1%) is early
terminated due to assertion failure. Our findings indicate that early test
termination harms both code coverage and the effectiveness of spectrum-based
fault localization. For instance, after eliminating early test termination, the
line/branch coverage is improved in 55% of the studied versions, and improves
the performance of two popular SBFL techniques Ochiai and Tarantula by 15.1% and
10.7% compared to the original setting (without eliminating early test
termination) in terms of MFR, respectively.
