Title: VLM-Fuzz: Vision Language Model Assisted Recursive Depth-first Search Exploration for Effective UI Testing of Android Apps
Authors: Biniam Fisseha Demissie, Yan Naing Tun, Lwin Khin Shar, Mariano Ceccato
ID: 2504.11675
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.11675

Abstract:
Testing Android apps effectively requires a systematic exploration of the app's
possible states by simulating user interactions and system events. While
existing approaches have proposed several fuzzing techniques to generate various
text inputs and trigger user and system events for UI state exploration,
achieving high code coverage remains a significant challenge in Android app
testing. The main challenges are (1) reasoning about the complex and dynamic
layout of UI screens; (2) generating required inputs/events to deal with certain
widgets like pop-ups; and (3) coordination between current test inputs and
previous inputs to avoid getting stuck in the same UI screen without improving
test coverage. To address these problems, we propose a novel, automated fuzzing
approach called VLM-Fuzz for effective UI testing of Android apps. We present a
novel heuristic-based depth-first search (DFS) exploration algorithm, assisted
with a vision language model (VLM), to effectively explore the UI states of the
app. We use static analysis to analyze the Android Manifest file and the runtime
UI hierarchy XML to extract the list of components, intent-filters and
interactive UI widgets. VLM is used to reason about complex UI layout and
widgets on an on-demand basis. Based on the inputs from static analysis, VLM,
and the current UI state, we use some heuristics to deal with the
above-mentioned challenges. We evaluated VLM-Fuzz based on a benchmark
containing 59 apps obtained from a recent work and compared it against two
state-of-the-art approaches: APE and DeepGUI. VLM-Fuzz outperforms the best
baseline by 9.0%, 3.7%, and 2.1% in terms of class coverage, method coverage,
and line coverage, respectively. We also ran VLM-Fuzz on 80 recent Google Play
apps (i.e., updated in 2024). VLM-Fuzz detected 208 unique crashes in 24 apps,
which have been reported to respective developers.
