Title: When Testing AI Tests Us: Safeguarding Mental Health on the Digital Frontlines
Authors: Sachin R. Pendse, Darren Gergle, Rachel Kornfield, Jonah Meyerhoff, David Mohr et al.
ID: 2504.20910
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20910

Abstract:
Red-teaming is a core part of the infrastructure that ensures that AI models do
not produce harmful content. Unlike past technologies, the black box nature of
generative AI systems necessitates a uniquely interactional mode of testing, one
in which individuals on red teams actively interact with the system, leveraging
natural language to simulate malicious actors and solicit harmful outputs. This
interactional labor done by red teams can result in mental health harms that are
uniquely tied to the adversarial engagement strategies necessary to effectively
red team. The importance of ensuring that generative AI models do not propagate
societal or individual harm is widely recognized -- one less visible foundation
of end-to-end AI safety is also the protection of the mental health and
wellbeing of those who work to keep model outputs safe. In this paper, we argue
that the unmet mental health needs of AI red-teamers is a critical workplace
safety concern. Through analyzing the unique mental health impacts associated
with the labor done by red teams, we propose potential individual and
organizational strategies that could be used to meet these needs, and safeguard
the mental health of red-teamers. We develop our proposed strategies through
drawing parallels between common red-teaming practices and interactional labor
common to other professions (including actors, mental health professionals,
conflict photographers, and content moderators), describing how individuals and
organizations within these professional spaces safeguard their mental health
given similar psychological demands. Drawing on these protective practices, we
describe how safeguards could be adapted for the distinct mental health
challenges experienced by red teaming organizations as they mitigate emerging
technological risks on the new digital frontlines.
