Title: On the calibration of Just-in-time Defect Prediction
Authors: Xhulja Shahini, Jone Bartel, Klaus Pohl
ID: 2504.12051
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.12051

Abstract:
Just in time defect prediction (JIT DP) leverages ML to identify defect-prone
code commits, enabling quality assurance (QA) teams to allocate resources more
efficiently by focusing on commits that are most likely to contain defects.
Although JIT DP techniques have introduced improvements in terms of predictive
accuracy, they are still susceptible to misclassification errors such as false
positives and negatives. This can lead to wasted resources or undetected
defects, a particularly critical concern when QA resources are limited. To
mitigate these challenges and preserve the practical utility of JIT DP tools, it
becomes essential to estimate the reliability of the predictions, i.e.,
computing confidence scores. Such scores can help practitioners determine the
trustworthiness of predictions and thus prioritize them efficiently. A simple
approach to computing confidence scores is to extract, alongside each
prediction, the corresponding prediction probabilities and use them as
indicators of confidence. However, for these probabilities to reliably serve as
confidence scores, the predictive model must be well-calibrated. This means that
the prediction probabilities must accurately represent the true likelihood of
each prediction being correct. Miscalibration, common in modern ML models,
distorts probability scores such that they do not align with the actual
correctness probability. In this study, we evaluate the calibration of three JIT
DP techniques to determine whether and to what extent they exhibit poor
calibration. Furthermore, we assess whether post-calibration methods can improve
the calibration of existing JIT defect prediction models. Our results reveal
that all evaluated JIT DP models exhibit some level of miscalibration, with ECE
ranging from 2-35%. Furthermore, post-calibration methods do not consistently
improve the calibration.
