Title: Search-TTA: A Multimodal Test-Time Adaptation Framework for Visual Search in the Wild
Authors: Derek Ming Siang Tan,  Shailesh, Boyang Liu, Alok Raj, Qi Xuan Ang et al.
ID: 2505.11350
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.11350

Abstract:
To perform outdoor visual navigation and search, a robot may leverage satellite
imagery to generate visual priors. This can help inform high-level search
strategies, even when such images lack sufficient resolution for target
recognition. However, many existing informative path planning or search-based
approaches either assume no prior information, or use priors without accounting
for how they were obtained. Recent work instead utilizes large Vision Language
Models (VLMs) for generalizable priors, but their outputs can be inaccurate due
to hallucination, leading to inefficient search. To address these challenges, we
introduce Search-TTA, a multimodal test-time adaptation framework with a
flexible plug-and-play interface compatible with various input modalities (e.g.,
image, text, sound) and planning methods (e.g., RL-based). First, we pretrain a
satellite image encoder to align with CLIP's visual encoder to output
probability distributions of target presence used for visual search. Second, our
TTA framework dynamically refines CLIP's predictions during search using
uncertainty-weighted gradient updates inspired by Spatial Poisson Point
Processes. To train and evaluate Search-TTA, we curate AVS-Bench, a visual
search dataset based on internet-scale ecological data containing 380k images
and taxonomy data. We find that Search-TTA improves planner performance by up to
30.0%, particularly in cases with poor initial CLIP predictions due to domain
mismatch and limited training data. It also performs comparably with
significantly larger VLMs, and achieves zero-shot generalization via emergent
alignment to unseen modalities. Finally, we deploy Search-TTA on a real UAV via
hardware-in-the-loop testing, by simulating its operation within a large-scale
simulation that provides onboard sensing.
