Title: Temac: Multi-Agent Collaboration for Automated Web GUI Testing
Authors: Chenxu Liu, Zhiyu Gu, Guoquan Wu, Ying Zhang, Jun Wei et al.
ID: 2506.00520
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.00520

Abstract:
Quality assurance of web applications is critical, as web applications play an
essential role in people's daily lives. To reduce labor costs, automated web GUI
testing (AWGT) is widely adopted, exploring web applications via GUI actions
such as clicks and text inputs. However, these approaches face limitations in
generating continuous and meaningful action sequences capable of covering
complex functionalities. Recent work incorporates large language models (LLMs)
for GUI testing. However, these approaches face various challenges, including
low efficiency of LLMs, high complexity of rich web application contexts, and a
low success rate of LLMs in executing GUI tasks. To address these challenges, in
this paper, we propose Temac, an approach that enhances AWGT using LLM-based
multi-agent collaboration to increase code coverage. Temac is motivated by our
insight that LLMs can enhance AWGT in executing complex functionalities, while
the information discovered during AWGT can, in turn, be provided as the domain
knowledge to improve the LLM-based task execution. Specifically, given a web
application, Temac initially runs an existing approach to broadly explore
application states. When the testing coverage stagnates, Temac then employs
LLM-based agents to summarize the collected information to form a knowledge base
and to infer not-covered functionalities. Guided by this knowledge base, Temac
finally uses specialized LLM-based agents to target and execute the not-covered
functionalities, reaching deeper states beyond those explored by the existing
approach. Our evaluation results show that Temac exceeds state-of-the-art
approaches from 12.5% to 60.3% on average code coverage on six complex
open-source web applications, while revealing 445 unique failures in the top 20
real-world web applications. These results strongly demonstrate the
effectiveness and the general applicability of Temac.
