Title: Hallucination to Consensus: Multi-Agent LLMs for End-to-End Test Generation
Authors: Qinghua Xu, Guancheng Wang, Lionel Briand, Kui Liu
ID: 2506.02943
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.02943

Abstract:
Unit testing plays a critical role in ensuring software correctness. However,
writing unit tests manually is labor-intensive, especially for strongly typed
languages like Java, motivating the need for automated approaches. Traditional
methods primarily rely on search-based or randomized algorithms to achieve high
code coverage and produce regression oracles, which are derived from the
program's current behavior rather than its intended functionality. Recent
advances in LLMs have enabled oracle generation from natural language
descriptions, aligning better with user requirements. However, existing
LLM-based methods often require fine-tuning or rely on external tools such as
EvoSuite for test prefix generation, making them costly or cumbersome to apply
in practice. In this work, we propose CANDOR, a novel prompt engineering-based
LLM framework for automated unit test generation in Java. CANDOR orchestrates
multiple specialized LLM agents to collaboratively generate complete tests. To
mitigate the notorious hallucinations in LLMs and improve oracle correctness, we
introduce a novel strategy that engages multiple reasoning LLMs in a panel
discussion and generates accurate oracles based on consensus. Additionally, to
reduce the verbosity of reasoning LLMs' outputs, we propose a novel dual-LLM
pipeline to produce concise and structured oracle evaluations. Our experiments
show that CANDOR is comparable with EvoSuite in generating tests with high code
coverage and clearly superior in terms of mutation score. Moreover, our prompt
engineering-based approach CANDOR significantly outperforms the SOTA
fine-tuning-based oracle generator TOGLL by at least 21.1 percentage points in
oracle correctness on both correct and faulty source code. Further ablation
studies confirm the critical contributions of key agents in generating
high-quality tests.
