Title: Query as Test: An Intelligent Driving Test and Data Storage Method for Integrated Cockpit-Vehicle-Road Scenarios
Authors: Shengyue Yao, Runqing Guo, Yangyang Qin, Miangbing Meng, Jipeng Cao et al.
ID: 2506.22068
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.22068

Abstract:
With the deep penetration of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in the transportation
sector, intelligent cockpits, autonomous driving, and intelligent road networks
are developing at an unprecedented pace. However, the data ecosystems of these
three key areas are increasingly fragmented and incompatible. Especially,
existing testing methods rely on data stacking, fail to cover all edge cases,
and lack flexibility. To address this issue, this paper introduces the concept
of "Query as Test" (QaT). This concept shifts the focus from rigid, prescripted
test cases to flexible, on-demand logical queries against a unified data
representation. Specifically, we identify the need for a fundamental improvement
in data storage and representation, leading to our proposal of "Extensible
Scenarios Notations" (ESN). ESN is a novel declarative data framework based on
Answer Set Programming (ASP), which uniformly represents heterogeneous
multimodal data from the cockpit, vehicle, and road as a collection of logical
facts and rules. This approach not only achieves deep semantic fusion of data,
but also brings three core advantages: (1) supports complex and flexible
semantic querying through logical reasoning; (2) provides natural
interpretability for decision-making processes; (3) allows for on-demand data
abstraction through logical rules, enabling fine-grained privacy protection. We
further elaborate on the QaT paradigm, transforming the functional validation
and safety compliance checks of autonomous driving systems into logical queries
against the ESN database, significantly enhancing the expressiveness and formal
rigor of the testing. Finally, we introduce the concept of "Validation-Driven
Development" (VDD), which suggests to guide developments by logical validation
rather than quantitative testing in the era of Large Language Models, in order
to accelerating the iteration and development process.
