Title: Mixture Experts with Test-Time Self-Supervised Aggregation for Tabular Imbalanced Regression
Authors: Yung-Chien Wang, Kuang-Da Wang, Wei-Yao Wang, Wen-Chih Peng
ID: 2506.07033
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.07033

Abstract:
Tabular data serve as a fundamental and ubiquitous representation of structured
information in numerous real-world applications, e.g., finance and urban
planning. In the realm of tabular imbalanced applications, data imbalance has
been investigated in classification tasks with insufficient instances in certain
labels, causing the model's ineffective generalizability. However, the imbalance
issue of tabular regression tasks is underexplored, and yet is critical due to
unclear boundaries for continuous labels and simplifying assumptions in existing
imbalance regression work, which often rely on known and balanced test
distributions. Such assumptions may not hold in practice and can lead to
performance degradation. To address these issues, we propose MATI: Mixture
Experts with Test-Time Self-Supervised Aggregation for Tabular Imbalance
Regression, featuring two key innovations: (i) the Region-Aware Mixture Expert,
which adopts a Gaussian Mixture Model to capture the underlying related regions.
The statistical information of each Gaussian component is then used to
synthesize and train region-specific experts to capture the unique
characteristics of their respective regions. (ii) Test-Time Self-Supervised
Expert Aggregation, which dynamically adjusts region expert weights based on
test data features to reinforce expert adaptation across varying test
distributions. We evaluated MATI on four real-world tabular imbalance regression
datasets, including house pricing, bike sharing, and age prediction. To reflect
realistic deployment scenarios, we adopted three types of test distributions: a
balanced distribution with uniform target frequencies, a normal distribution
that follows the training data, and an inverse distribution that emphasizes rare
target regions. On average across these three test distributions, MATI achieved
a 7.1% improvement in MAE compared to existing methods.
