Title: PALM: Synergizing Program Analysis and LLMs to Enhance Rust Unit Test Coverage
Authors: Bei Chu, Yang Feng, Kui Liu, Hange Shi, Zifan Nan et al.
ID: 2506.09002
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.09002

Abstract:
Unit testing is essential for ensuring software reliability and correctness.
Classic Search-Based Software Testing (SBST) methods and concolic
execution-based approaches for generating unit tests often fail to achieve high
coverage due to difficulties in handling complex program units, such as
branching conditions and external dependencies. Recent work has increasingly
utilized large language models (LLMs) to generate test cases, improving the
quality of test generation by providing better context and correcting errors in
the model's output. However, these methods rely on fixed prompts, resulting in
relatively low compilation success rates and coverage. This paper presents PALM,
an approach that leverages large language models (LLMs) to enhance the
generation of high-coverage unit tests. PALM performs program analysis to
identify branching conditions within functions, which are then combined into
path constraints. These constraints and relevant contextual information are used
to construct prompts that guide the LLMs in generating unit tests. We implement
the approach and evaluate it in 15 open-source Rust crates. Experimental results
show that within just two or three hours, PALM can significantly improve test
coverage compared to classic methods, with increases in overall project coverage
exceeding 50% in some instances and its generated tests achieving an average
coverage of 72.30%, comparable to human effort (70.94%), highlighting the
potential of LLMs in automated test generation. We submitted 91 PALM-generated
unit tests targeting new code. Of these submissions, 80 were accepted, 5 were
rejected, and 6 remain pending review. The results demonstrate the effectiveness
of integrating program analysis with AI and open new avenues for future research
in automated software testing.
