Title: GUIPilot: A Consistency-based Mobile GUI Testing Approach for Detecting Application-specific Bugs
Authors: Ruofan Liu, Xiwen Teoh, Yun Lin, Guanjie Chen, Ruofei Ren et al.
ID: 2506.07385
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.07385

Abstract:
In this work, we propose GUIPilot, an approach for detecting inconsistencies
between the mobile design and their implementations. The mobile design usually
consists of design mock-ups that specify (1) the expected screen appearances
(e.g., widget layouts, colors, and shapes) and (2) the expected screen
behaviors, regarding how one screen can transition into another (e.g., labeled
widgets with textual description). Given a design mock-up and the implementation
of its application, GUIPilot reports both their screen inconsistencies as well
as process inconsistencies. On the one hand, GUIPilot detects the screen
inconsistencies by abstracting every screen into a widget container where each
widget is represented by its position, width, height, and type. By defining the
partial order of widgets and the costs of replacing, inserting, and deleting
widgets in a screen, we convert the screen-matching problem into an optimizable
widget alignment problem. On the other hand, we translate the specified GUI
transition into stepwise actions on the mobile screen (e.g., click, long-press,
input text on some widgets). To this end, we propose a visual prompt for the
vision-language model to infer widget-specific actions on the screen. By this
means, we can validate the presence or absence of expected transitions in the
implementation. Our extensive experiments on 80 mobile applications and 160
design mock-ups show that (1) GUIPilot can achieve 94.5% precision and 99.6%
recall in detecting screen inconsistencies, outperforming the state-of-the-art
approach, such as GVT, by 66.2% and 56.6% respectively, and (2) GUIPilot reports
zero errors in detecting process inconsistencies. Furthermore, our industrial
case study on applying GUIPilot on a trading mobile application shows that
GUIPilot has detected nine application bugs, and all the bugs were confirmed by
the original application experts.
