Title: Generate Realistic Test Scenes for V2X Communication Systems
Authors: An Guo, Xinyu Gao, Chunrong Fang, Haoxiang Tian, Weisong Sun et al.
ID: 2506.07419
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.07419

Abstract:
Accurately perceiving complex driving environments is essential for ensuring the
safe operation of autonomous vehicles. With the tremendous progress in deep
learning and communication technologies, cooperative perception with
Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) technologies has emerged as a solution to overcome
the limitations of single-agent perception systems in perceiving distant objects
and occlusions. Despite the considerable advancements, V2X cooperative
perception systems require thorough testing and continuous enhancement of system
performance. Given that V2X driving scenes entail intricate communications with
multiple vehicles across various geographic locations, creating V2X test scenes
for these systems poses a significant challenge. Moreover, current testing
methodologies rely on manual data collection and labeling, which are both
time-consuming and costly. In this paper, we design and implement V2XGen, an
automated testing generation tool for V2X cooperative perception systems. V2XGen
utilizes a high-fidelity approach to generate realistic cooperative object
instances and strategically place them within the background data in crucial
positions. Furthermore, V2XGen adopts a fitness-guided V2X scene generation
strategy for the transformed scene generation process and improves testing
efficiency. We conduct experiments on V2XGen using multiple cooperative
perception systems with different fusion schemes to assess its performance on
various tasks. The experimental results demonstrate that V2XGen is capable of
generating realistic test scenes and effectively detecting erroneous behaviors
in different V2X-oriented driving conditions. Furthermore, the results validate
that retraining systems under test with the generated scenes can enhance average
detection precision while reducing occlusion and long-range perception errors.
