Title: Quality attributes of test cases and test suites -- importance & challenges from practitioners' perspectives
Authors: Huynh Khanh Vi Tran, Nauman bin Ali, Michael Unterkalmsteiner, Jürgen Börstler, Panagiota Chatzipetrou
ID: 2507.06343
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.06343

Abstract:
Context: The quality of the test suites and the constituent test cases
significantly impacts confidence in software testing. While research has
identified several quality attributes of test cases and test suites, there is a
need for a better understanding of their relative importance in practice.
Objective: We investigate practitioners' perceptions regarding the relative
importance of quality attributes of test cases and test suites and the
challenges they face in ensuring the perceived important quality attributes.
Method: We conducted an industrial survey using a questionnaire based on the
quality attributes identified in an extensive literature review. We used a
sampling strategy that leverages LinkedIn to draw a large and heterogeneous
sample of professionals with experience in software testing. Results: We
collected 354 responses from practitioners with a wide range of experience. We
found that the majority of practitioners rated Fault Detection, Usability,
Maintainability, Reliability, and Coverage to be the most important quality
attributes. Resource Efficiency, Reusability, and Simplicity received the most
divergent opinions, which, according to our analysis, depend on the
software-testing contexts. We identified common challenges that apply to the
important attributes, namely inadequate definition, lack of useful metrics, lack
of an established review process, and lack of external support. Conclusion: The
findings point out where practitioners actually need further support with
respect to achieving high-quality test cases and test suites under different
software testing contexts. The findings can serve as a guideline for academic
researchers when looking for research directions on the topic. The findings can
also be used to encourage companies to provide more support to practitioners to
achieve high-quality test cases and test suites.
