Title: Search-based Selection of Metamorphic Relations for Optimized Robustness Testing of Large Language Models
Authors: Sangwon Hyun, Shaukat Ali, M. Ali Babar
ID: 2507.05565
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.05565

Abstract:
Assessing the trustworthiness of Large Language Models (LLMs), such as
robustness, has garnered significant attention. Recently, metamorphic testing
that defines Metamorphic Relations (MRs) has been widely applied to evaluate the
robustness of LLM executions. However, the MR-based robustness testing still
requires a scalable number of MRs, thereby necessitating the optimization of
selecting MRs. Most extant LLM testing studies are limited to automatically
generating test cases (i.e., MRs) to enhance failure detection. Additionally,
most studies only considered a limited test space of single perturbation MRs in
their evaluation of LLMs. In contrast, our paper proposes a search-based
approach for optimizing the MR groups to maximize failure detection and minimize
the LLM execution cost. Moreover, our approach covers the combinatorial
perturbations in MRs, facilitating the expansion of test space in the robustness
assessment. We have developed a search process and implemented four search
algorithms: Single-GA, NSGA-II, SPEA2, and MOEA/D with novel encoding to solve
the MR selection problem in the LLM robustness testing. We conducted comparative
experiments on the four search algorithms along with a random search, using two
major LLMs with primary Text-to-Text tasks. Our statistical and empirical
investigation revealed two key findings: (1) the MOEA/D algorithm performed the
best in optimizing the MR space for LLM robustness testing, and (2) we
identified silver bullet MRs for the LLM robustness testing, which demonstrated
dominant capabilities in confusing LLMs across different Text-to-Text tasks. In
LLM robustness assessment, our research sheds light on the fundamental problem
for optimized testing and provides insights into search-based solutions.
