Title: Test-Time Model Adaptation for Quantized Neural Networks
Authors: Zeshuai Deng, Guohao Chen, Shuaicheng Niu, Hui Luo, Shuhai Zhang et al.
ID: 2508.02180
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.02180

Abstract:
Quantizing deep models prior to deployment is a widely adopted technique to
speed up inference for various real-time applications, such as autonomous
driving. However, quantized models often suffer from severe performance
degradation in dynamic environments with potential domain shifts and this
degradation is significantly more pronounced compared with their full-precision
counterparts, as shown by our theoretical and empirical illustrations. To
address the domain shift problem, test-time adaptation (TTA) has emerged as an
effective solution by enabling models to learn adaptively from test data.
Unfortunately, existing TTA methods are often impractical for quantized models
as they typically rely on gradient backpropagation--an operation that is
unsupported on quantized models due to vanishing gradients, as well as memory
and latency constraints. In this paper, we focus on TTA for quantized models to
improve their robustness and generalization ability efficiently. We propose a
continual zeroth-order adaptation (ZOA) framework that enables efficient model
adaptation using only two forward passes, eliminating the computational burden
of existing methods. Moreover, we propose a domain knowledge management scheme
to store and reuse different domain knowledge with negligible memory
consumption, reducing the interference of different domain knowledge and
fostering the knowledge accumulation during long-term adaptation. Experimental
results on three classical architectures, including quantized transformer-based
and CNN-based models, demonstrate the superiority of our methods for quantized
model adaptation. On the quantized W6A6 ViT-B model, our ZOA is able to achieve
a 5.0\% improvement over the state-of-the-art FOA on ImageNet-C dataset. The
source code is available at https://github.com/DengZeshuai/ZOA.
