Title: Breaking New Ground in Software Defect Prediction: Introducing Practical and Actionable Metrics with Superior Predictive Power for Enhanced Decision-Making
Authors: Carlos Andrés Ramírez Cataño, Makoto Itoh
ID: 2508.04408
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.04408

Abstract:
Software defect prediction using code metrics has been extensively researched
over the past five decades. However, prediction harnessing non-software metrics
is under-researched. Considering that the root cause of software defects is
often attributed to human error, human factors theory might offer key
forecasting metrics for actionable insights. This paper explores automated
software defect prediction at the method level based on the developers' coding
habits. First, we propose a framework for deciding the metrics to conduct
predictions. Next, we compare the performance of our metrics to that of the code
and commit history metrics shown by research to achieve the highest performance
to date. Finally, we analyze the prediction importance of each metric. As a
result of our analyses of twenty-one critical infrastructure large-scale
open-source software projects, we have presented: (1) a human error-based
framework with metrics useful for defect prediction at method level; (2) models
using our proposed metrics achieve better average prediction performance than
the state-of-the-art code metrics and history measures; (3) the prediction
importance of all metrics distributes differently with each of the novel metrics
having better average importance than code and history metrics; (4) the novel
metrics dramatically enhance the explainability, practicality, and actionability
of software defect prediction models, significantly advancing the field. We
present a systematic approach to forecasting defect-prone software methods via a
human error framework. This work empowers practitioners to act on predictions,
empirically demonstrating how developer coding habits contribute to defects in
software systems.
