Title: Unit Test Update through LLM-Driven Context Collection and Error-Type-Aware Refinement
Authors: Yuanhe Zhang, Zhiquan Yang, Shengyi Pan, Zhongxin Liu
ID: 2509.24419
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.24419

Abstract:
Unit testing is critical for ensuring software quality and software system
stability. The current practice of manually maintaining unit tests suffers from
low efficiency and the risk of delayed or overlooked fixes. Therefore, an
automated approach is required to instantly update unit tests, with the
capability to both repair and enhance unit tests. However, existing automated
test maintenance methods primarily focus on repairing broken tests, neglecting
the scenario of enhancing existing tests to verify new functionality. Meanwhile,
due to their reliance on rule-based context collection and the lack of
verification mechanisms, existing approaches struggle to handle complex code
changes and often produce test cases with low correctness. To address these
challenges, we propose TESTUPDATER, a novel LLM based approach that enables
automated just-in-time test updates in response to production code changes.
TESTUPDATER first leverages the LLM to analyze code changes and identify
relevant context, which it then extracts and filters. Then, through carefully
designed prompts, TESTUPDATER guides the LLM step by step to handle various
types of code changes and introduce new dependencies, enabling both test repair
and enhancement. Finally, we introduce an error-type-aware iterative refinement
mechanism that executes the LLM-updated tests and repairs failures, which
significantly improves the overall correctness of test updates. Since existing
test repair datasets lack scenarios of test enhancement, we further construct a
new benchmark, UPDATES4J, with 195 real-world samples from 7 projects.
Experimental results show that TESTUPDATER achieves a compilation pass rate of
94.4% and a test pass rate of 86.7%, outperforming the state-of-the-art method
SYNTER by 15.9% and 20.0%, respectively. Furthermore, TESTUPDATER exhibits 12.9%
higher branch coverage and 15.2% greater line coverage than SYNTER.
