Title: IoTFuzzSentry: A Protocol Guided Mutation Based Fuzzer for Automatic Vulnerability Testing in Commercial IoT Devices
Authors: Priyanka Rushikesh Chaudhary, Rajib Ranjan Maiti
ID: 2509.09158
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.09158

Abstract:
Protocol fuzzing is a scalable and cost-effective technique for identifying
security vulnerabilities in deployed Internet of Things devices. During their
operational phase, IoT devices often run lightweight servers to handle user
interactions, such as video streaming or image capture in smart cameras.
Implementation flaws in transport or application-layer security mechanisms can
expose IoT devices to a range of threats, including unauthorized access and data
leakage. This paper addresses the challenge of uncovering such vulnerabilities
by leveraging protocol fuzzing techniques that inject crafted transport and
application-layer packets into IoT communications. We present a mutation-based
fuzzing tool, named IoTFuzzSentry, to identify specific non-trivial
vulnerabilities in commercial IoT devices. We further demonstrate how these
vulnerabilities can be exploited in real-world scenarios. We integrated our
fuzzing tool into a well-known testing tool Cotopaxi and evaluated it with
commercial-off-the-shelf IoT devices such as IP cameras and Smart Plug. Our
evaluation revealed vulnerabilities categorized into 4 types (IoT Access
Credential Leakage, Sneak IoT Live Video Stream, Creep IoT Live Image, IoT
Command Injection) and we show their exploits using three IoT devices. We have
responsibly disclosed all these vulnerabilities to the respective vendors. So
far, we have published two CVEs, CVE-2024-41623 and CVE-2024-42531, and one is
awaiting. To extend the applicability, we have investigated the traffic of six
additional IoT devices and our analysis shows that these devices can have
similar vulnerabilities, due to the presence of a similar set of application
protocols. We believe that IoTFuzzSentry has the potential to discover
unconventional security threats and allow IoT vendors to strengthen the security
of their commercialized IoT devices automatically with negligible overhead.
