Title: Exploring Instruction Data Quality for Explainable Image Quality Assessment
Authors: Yunhao Li, Sijing Wu, Huiyu Duan, Yucheng Zhu, Qi Jia et al.
ID: 2510.03880
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.03880

Abstract:
In recent years, with the rapid development of powerful multimodal large
language models (MLLMs), explainable image quality assessment (IQA) has
gradually become popular, aiming at providing quality-related descriptions and
answers of images. To achieve this goal, recent methods seek to construct a
large-scale instruction tuning dataset to empower the MLLM with quality
perception ability following the well-known scaling law. However, a large amount
of instruction tuning data may cause substantial computational costs and
redundant data, which in turn will cause harm to the performance of the model.
To cope with this problem, in this paper, we challenge the scaling law and
systematically investigate the role of data quality of the instruction tuning
dataset for explainable IQA. Using a powerful pre-trained MLLM, we first
investigate the changes in model performance after fine-tuning with different
sizes of instruction tuning data. We find that selecting a subset of the data
set randomly using an appropriate ratio can even lead to better results than
training with the entire instruction tuning dataset, demonstrating the
redundancy of current explainable IQA instruction tuning data. Beyond randomly
sampling a subset, we propose a clustering-based data selection framework with
three stages: clustering feature extraction, cluster quota allocation, and
cluster sampling strategy. Then we systematically analyze the choices of each
stage and propose a simple but efficient data selection method IQA-Select for
explainable IQA. The experimental results demonstrate that IQA-Select can
achieve 102.1% and 103.7% performance of full fine-tuning using only 10%
selected data in Q-Bench and AesBench respectively, significantly reducing
computational costs while achieving better performance.
