Title: How Many Code and Test Cases Are Enough? Evaluating Test Cases Generation from a Binary-Matrix Perspective
Authors: Xianzhen Luo, Jinyang Huang, Wenzhen Zheng, Qingfu Zhu, Mingzheng Xu et al.
ID: 2510.08720
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.08720

Abstract:
Evaluating test cases automatically generated by Large Language Models (LLMs) is
a critical yet challenging task. Existing benchmarks often evaluate the
exclusion ratio on large, unstructured collections of wrong codes, suffering
from high computational costs and score inflation. Furthermore, they
inadvertently reward generators that detect common, trivial bugs, while failing
to penalize their inability to identify rare yet critical faults. In this work,
we connect two fundamental questions: (1) What is the minimal set of wrong codes
sufficient to represent the entire error space? and (2) What is the minimal set
of test cases needed to distinguish them? We introduce a novel framework that
formalizes benchmark construction as finding an optimal diagnostic basis in a
binary code-test matrix, where rows represent wrong codes and columns represent
test case results. The rank of this matrix specifies the minimal number of
independent error patterns (wrong codes) and provides a tight upper bound on the
number of test cases required for complete fault coverage. Our objective is to
identify a basis of size equal to the matrix rank that maximizes internal
diversity. To tackle this NP-hard problem, we propose WrongSelect, an efficient
approximation algorithm to select maximally diverse wrong codes. Applying this
framework to millions of competitive programming submissions, we construct
TC-Bench, a compact, diverse, and inflation-resistant benchmark. Extensive
experiments show that even the most advanced test case generation methods
achieve only ~60% exclusion rates on TC-Bench, exposing a significant gap in
their diagnostic power and highlighting substantial room for future improvement.
Our dataset is available at: https://huggingface.co/datasets/Luoberta/TC-Bench
and our code is at: https://github.com/Luowaterbi/TC-Bench.
