Title: Contrasting the Hyperparameter Tuning Impact Across Software Defect Prediction Scenarios
Authors: Mohamed Sami Rakha, Andriy Miranskyy, Daniel Alencar da Costa
ID: 2510.16665
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16665

Abstract:
Software defect prediction (SDP) is crucial for delivering high-quality software
products. Recent research has indicated that prediction performance improvements
in SDP are achievable by applying hyperparameter tuning to a particular SDP
scenario. However, the positive impact resulting from the hyperparameter tuning
step may differ based on the targeted SDP scenario. Comparing the impact of
hyperparameter tuning across SDP scenarios is necessary to provide comprehensive
insights and enhance the robustness, generalizability, and, eventually, the
practicality of SDP modeling for quality assurance. Therefore, in this study, we
contrast the impact of hyperparameter tuning across two pivotal and consecutive
SDP scenarios: (1) Inner Version Defect Prediction (IVDP) and (2) Cross Version
Defect Prediction (CVDP). The main distinctions between the two scenarios lie in
the scope of defect prediction and the selected evaluation setups. This study's
experiments use common evaluation setups, 28 machine learning (ML) algorithms,
53 post-release software datasets, two tuning algorithms, and five optimization
metrics. We apply statistical analytics to compare the SDP performance impact
differences by investigating the overall impact, the single ML algorithm impact,
and variations across different software dataset sizes. The results indicate
that the SDP gains within the IVDP scenario are significantly larger than those
within the CVDP scenario. The results reveal that asserting performance gains
for up to 24 out of 28 ML algorithms may not hold across multiple SDP scenarios.
Furthermore, we found that small software datasets are more susceptible to
larger differences in performance impacts. Overall, the study findings recommend
software engineering researchers and practitioners to consider the effect of the
selected SDP scenario when expecting performance gains from hyperparameter
tuning.
