Title: Generating High-Level Test Cases from Requirements using LLM: An Industry Study
Authors: Satoshi Masuda, Satoshi Kouzawa, Kyousuke Sezai, Hidetoshi Suhara, Yasuaki Hiruta et al.
ID: 2510.03641
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.03641

Abstract:
Currently, generating high-level test cases described in natural language from
requirement documents is performed manually. In the industry, including
companies specializing in software testing, there is a significant demand for
the automatic generation of high-level test cases from requirement documents
using Large Language Models (LLMs). Efforts to utilize LLMs for requirement
analysis are underway. In some cases, retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) is
employed for generating high-level test cases using LLMs. However, in practical
applications, it is necessary to create a RAG tailored to the knowledge system
of each specific application, which is labor-intensive. Moreover, when applying
high-level test case generation as a prompt, there is no established method for
instructing the generation of high-level test cases at a level applicable to
other specifications without using RAG. It is required to establish a method for
the automatic generation of high-level test cases that can be generalized across
a wider range of requirement documents. In this paper, we propose a method for
generating high-level (GHL) test cases from requirement documents using only
prompts, without creating RAGs. In the proposed method, first, the requirement
document is input into the LLM to generate test design techniques corresponding
to the requirement document. Then, high-level test cases are generated for each
of the generated test design techniques. Furthermore, we verify an evaluation
method based on semantic similarity of the generated high-level test cases. In
the experiments, we confirmed the method using datasets from Bluetooth and
Mozilla, where requirement documents and high-level test cases are available,
achieving macro-recall measurement of 0.81 and 0.37, respectively. We believe
that the method is feasible for practical application in generating high-level
test cases without using RAG.
