Title: Automated Discovery of Test Oracles for Database Management Systems Using LLMs
Authors: Qiuyang Mang, Runyuan He, Suyang Zhong, Xiaoxuan Liu, Huanchen Zhang et al.
ID: 2510.06663
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.06663

Abstract:
Since 2020, automated testing for Database Management Systems (DBMSs) has
flourished, uncovering hundreds of bugs in widely-used systems. A cornerstone of
these techniques is test oracle, which typically implements a mechanism to
generate equivalent query pairs, thereby identifying bugs by checking the
consistency between their results. However, while applying these oracles can be
automated, their design remains a fundamentally manual endeavor. This paper
explores the use of large language models (LLMs) to automate the discovery and
instantiation of test oracles, addressing a long-standing bottleneck towards
fully automated DBMS testing. Although LLMs demonstrate impressive creativity,
they are prone to hallucinations that can produce numerous false positive bug
reports. Furthermore, their significant monetary cost and latency mean that LLM
invocations should be limited to ensure that bug detection is efficient and
economical. To this end, we introduce Argus, a novel framework built upon the
core concept of the Constrained Abstract Query - a SQL skeleton containing
placeholders and their associated instantiation conditions (e.g., requiring a
placeholder to be filled by a boolean column). Argus uses LLMs to generate pairs
of these skeletons that are asserted to be semantically equivalent. This
equivalence is then formally proven using a SQL equivalence solver to ensure
soundness. Finally, the placeholders within the verified skeletons are
instantiated with concrete, reusable SQL snippets that are also synthesized by
LLMs to efficiently produce complex test cases. We implemented Argus and
evaluated it on five extensively tested DBMSs, discovering 40 previously unknown
bugs, 35 of which are logic bugs, with 36 confirmed and 26 already fixed by the
developers.
