Title: SRE-Llama -- Fine-Tuned Meta's Llama LLM, Federated Learning, Blockchain and NFT Enabled Site Reliability Engineering(SRE) Platform for Communication and Networking Software Services
Authors: Eranga Bandara, Safdar H. Bouk, Sachin Shetty, Ravi Mukkamala, Abdul Rahman et al.
ID: 2511.08282
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.08282

Abstract:
Software services are crucial for reliable communication and networking;
therefore, Site Reliability Engineering (SRE) is important to ensure these
systems stay reliable and perform well in cloud-native environments. SRE
leverages tools like Prometheus and Grafana to monitor system metrics, defining
critical Service Level Indicators (SLIs) and Service Level Objectives (SLOs) for
maintaining high service standards. However, a significant challenge arises as
many developers often lack in-depth understanding of these tools and the
intricacies involved in defining appropriate SLIs and SLOs. To bridge this gap,
we propose a novel SRE platform, called SRE-Llama, enhanced by Generative-AI,
Federated Learning, Blockchain, and Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs). This platform
aims to automate and simplify the process of monitoring, SLI/SLO generation, and
alert management, offering ease in accessibility and efficy for developers. The
system operates by capturing metrics from cloud-native services and storing them
in a time-series database, like Prometheus and Mimir. Utilizing this stored
data, our platform employs Federated Learning models to identify the most
relevant and impactful SLI metrics for different services and SLOs, addressing
concerns around data privacy. Subsequently, fine-tuned Meta's Llama-3 LLM is
adopted to intelligently generate SLIs, SLOs, error budgets, and associated
alerting mechanisms based on these identified SLI metrics. A unique aspect of
our platform is the encoding of generated SLIs and SLOs as NFT objects, which
are then stored on a Blockchain. This feature provides immutable record-keeping
and facilitates easy verification and auditing of the SRE metrics and
objectives. The automation of the proposed platform is governed by the
blockchain smart contracts. The proposed SRE-Llama platform prototype has been
implemented with a use case featuring a customized Open5GS 5G Core.
