Title: LLMCFG-TGen: Using LLM-Generated Control Flow Graphs to Automatically Create Test Cases from Use Cases
Authors: Zhenzhen Yang, Chenhui Cui, Tao Li, Rubing Huang, Nan Niu et al.
ID: 2512.06401
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.06401

Abstract:
Appropriate test case generation is critical in software testing, significantly
impacting the quality of the testing. Requirements-Based Test Generation (RBTG)
derives test cases from software requirements, aiming to verify whether or not
the system's behaviors align with user needs and expectations. Requirements are
often documented in Natural Language (NL), with use-case descriptions being a
popular method for capturing functional behaviors and interaction flows in a
structured form. Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown strong potential for
automating test generation directly from NL requirements. However, current
LLM-based approaches may not provide comprehensive, non-redundant coverage. They
may also fail to capture complex conditional logic in requirements, resulting in
incomplete test cases. We propose a new approach that automatically generates
test cases from NL use-case descriptions, called Test Generation based on
LLM-generated Control Flow Graphs (LLMCFG-TGen). LLMCFG-TGen comprises three
main steps: (1) An LLM transforms a use case into a structured CFG that
encapsulates all potential branches; (2) The generated CFG is explored, and all
complete execution paths are enumerated; and (3) The execution paths are then
used to generate the test cases. To evaluate our proposed approach, we conducted
a series of experiments. The results show that LLMs can effectively construct
well-structured CFGs from NL use cases. Compared with the baseline methods,
LLMCFG-TGen achieves full path coverage, improving completeness and ensuring
clear and accurate test cases. Practitioner assessments confirm that LLMCFG-TGen
produces logically consistent and comprehensive test cases, while substantially
reducing manual effort. The findings suggest that coupling LLM-based semantic
reasoning with structured modeling effectively bridges the gap between NL
requirements and systematic test generation.
