Title: Bug Priority Change Prediction: An Exploratory Study on Apache Software
Authors: Guangzong Cai, Zengyang Li, Peng Liang, Ran Mo, Hui Liu et al.
ID: 2512.09216
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.09216

Abstract:
Bug fixing is a critical activity in the software development process. In issue
tracking systems such as JIRA, each bug report is assigned a priority level to
indicate the urgency and importance level of the bug. The priority may change
during the bug fixing process, indicating that the urgency and importance level
of the bug will change with the bug fixing. However, manually evaluating
priority changes for bugs is a tedious process that heavily relies on the
subjective judgment of developers and project managers, leading to incorrect
priority changes and thus hindering timely bug fixes. Given the lack of research
on bug priority change prediction, we propose a novel two-phase bug report
priority change prediction method based on bug fixing evolution features and
class imbalance handling strategy. Specifically, we divided the bug lifecycle
into two phases: bug reporting and bug fixing, and constructed bug priority
change prediction models for each phase. To evaluate the performance of our
method, we conducted experiments on a bug dataset constructed from 32
non-trivial Apache projects. The experimental results show that our proposed bug
fixing evolution features and the adopted class imbalance handling strategy can
effectively improve the performance of prediction models. The F1-score of the
prediction model constructed for the bug reporting phase reached 0.798, while
the F1-weighted and F1-macro of the prediction model constructed for the bug
fixing phase were 0.712 and 0.613, respectively. Furthermore, we explored the
cross-project applicability of our prediction models and their performance at
different priority levels. The findings indicate large variations in model
performance across different projects, although the overall scores remain
decent. Meanwhile, the predictive performance across various priority levels
remained relatively consistently high.
