Title: Negativity in Self-Admitted Technical Debt: How Sentiment Influences Prioritization
Authors: Nathan Cassee, Neil Ernst, Nicole Novielli, Alexander Serebrenik
ID: 2501.01068
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.01068

Abstract:
Self-Admitted Technical Debt, or SATD, is a self-admission of technical debt
present in a software system. To effectively manage SATD, developers need to
estimate its priority and assess the effort required to fix the described
technical debt. About a quarter of descriptions of SATD in software systems
express some form of negativity or negative emotions when describing technical
debt. In this paper, we report on an experiment conducted with 59 respondents to
study whether negativity expressed in the description of SATD \textbf{actually}
affects the prioritization of SATD. The respondents are a mix of professional
developers and students, and in the experiment, we asked participants to
prioritize four vignettes: two expressing negativity and two expressing neutral
sentiment. To ensure realism, vignettes were based on existing SATD. We find
that negativity causes between one-third and half of developers to prioritize
SATD, in which negativity is expressed as having more priority. Developers
affected by negativity when prioritizing SATD are twice as likely to increase
their estimation of urgency and 1.5 times as likely to increase their estimation
of importance and effort for SATD compared to the likelihood of decreasing these
prioritization scores. Our findings show how developers actively use negativity
in SATD to determine how urgently a particular instance of TD should be
addressed. However, our study also describes a gap in the actions and belief of
developers. Even if 33% to 50% use negativity to prioritize SATD, 67% of
developers believe that using negativity as a proxy for priority is
unacceptable. Therefore, we would not recommend using negativity as a proxy for
priority. However, we also recognize that developers might unavoidably express
negativity when describing technical debt.
