Title: Testing Research Software: An In-Depth Survey of Practices, Methods, and Tools
Authors: Nasir U. Eisty, Upulee Kanewala, Jeffrey C. Carver
ID: 2501.17739
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.17739

Abstract:
Context: Research software is essential for developing advanced tools and models
to solve complex research problems and drive innovation across domains.
Therefore, it is essential to ensure its correctness. Software testing plays a
vital role in this task. However, testing research software is challenging due
to the software's complexity and to the unique culture of the research software
community. Aims: Building on previous research, this study provides an in-depth
investigation of testing practices in research software, focusing on test case
design, challenges with expected outputs, use of quality metrics, execution
methods, tools, and desired tool features. Additionally, we explore whether
demographic factors influence testing processes. Method: We survey research
software developers to understand how they design test cases, handle output
challenges, use metrics, execute tests, and select tools. Results: Research
software testing varies widely. The primary challenges are test case design,
evaluating test quality, and evaluating the correctness of test outputs.
Overall, research software developers are not familiar with existing testing
tools and have a need for new tools to support their specific needs. Conclusion:
Allocating human resources to testing and providing developers with knowledge
about effective testing techniques are important steps toward improving the
testing process of research software. While many industrial testing tools exist,
they are inadequate for testing research software due to its complexity,
specialized algorithms, continuous updates, and need for flexible, custom
testing approaches. Access to a standard set of testing tools that address these
special characteristics will increase level of testing in research software
development and reduce the overhead of distributing knowledge about software
testing.
