Title: Practical Pipeline-Aware Regression Test Optimization for Continuous Integration
Authors: Daniel Schwendner, Maximilian Jungwirth, Martin Gruber, Martin Knoche, Daniel Merget et al.
ID: 2501.11550
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.11550

Abstract:
Massive, multi-language, monolithic repositories form the backbone of many
modern, complex software systems. To ensure consistent code quality while still
allowing fast development cycles, Continuous Integration (CI) is commonly
applied. However, operating CI at such scale not only leads to a single point of
failure for many developers, but also requires computational resources that may
reach feasibility limits and cause long feedback latencies. To address these
issues, developers commonly split test executions across multiple pipelines,
running small and fast tests in pre-submit stages while executing long-running
and flaky tests in post-submit pipelines. Given the long runtimes of many
pipelines and the substantial proportion of passing test executions (98% in our
pre-submit pipelines), there not only a need but also potential for further
improvements by prioritizing and selecting tests. However, many previously
proposed regression optimization techniques are unfit for an industrial context,
because they (1) rely on complex and difficult-to-obtain features like per-test
code coverage that are not feasible in large, multi-language environments, (2)
do not automatically adapt to rapidly changing systems where new tests are
continuously added or modified, and (3) are not designed to distinguish the
different objectives of pre- and post-submit pipelines: While pre-submit testing
should prioritize failing tests, post-submit pipelines should prioritize tests
that indicate non-flaky changes by transitioning from pass to fail outcomes or
vice versa. To overcome these issues, we developed a lightweight and
pipeline-aware regression test optimization approach that employs Reinforcement
Learning models trained on language-agnostic features. We evaluated our approach
on a large industry dataset collected over a span of 20 weeks of CI test
executions. When predicting...
