Title: Understanding the Effectiveness of LLMs in Automated Self-Admitted Technical Debt Repayment
Authors: Mohammad Sadegh Sheikhaei, Yuan Tian, Shaowei Wang, Bowen Xu
ID: 2501.09888
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.09888

Abstract:
Self-Admitted Technical Debt (SATD), cases where developers intentionally
acknowledge suboptimal solutions in code through comments, poses a significant
challenge to software maintainability. Left unresolved, SATD can degrade code
quality and increase maintenance costs. While Large Language Models (LLMs) have
shown promise in tasks like code generation and program repair, their potential
in automated SATD repayment remains underexplored. In this paper, we identify
three key challenges in training and evaluating LLMs for SATD repayment: (1)
dataset representativeness and scalability, (2) removal of irrelevant SATD
repayments, and (3) limitations of existing evaluation metrics. To address the
first two dataset-related challenges, we adopt a language-independent SATD
tracing tool and design a 10-step filtering pipeline to extract SATD repayments
from repositories, resulting two large-scale datasets: 58,722 items for Python
and 97,347 items for Java. To improve evaluation, we introduce two diff-based
metrics, BLEU-diff and CrystalBLEU-diff, which measure code changes rather than
whole code. Additionally, we propose another new metric, LEMOD, which is both
interpretable and informative. Using our new benchmarks and evaluation metrics,
we evaluate two types of automated SATD repayment methods: fine-tuning smaller
models, and prompt engineering with five large-scale models. Our results reveal
that fine-tuned small models achieve comparable Exact Match (EM) scores to
prompt-based approaches but underperform on BLEU-based metrics and LEMOD.
Notably, Gemma-2-9B leads in EM, addressing 10.1% of Python and 8.1% of Java
SATDs, while Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct and GPT-4o-mini excel on BLEU-diff,
CrystalBLEU-diff, and LEMOD metrics. Our work contributes a robust benchmark,
improved evaluation metrics, and a comprehensive evaluation of LLMs, advancing
research on automated SATD repayment.
