Title: Development of a Validation and Inspection Tool for Armband-based Lifelog Data (VITAL) to Facilitate the Clinical Use of Wearable Data: A Prototype and Usability Evaluation
Authors: Im Eunyoung, Kang Sunghoon, Kim Hyeoneui
ID: 2501.14133
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.14133

Abstract:
Background: The rise of mobile technology and health apps has increased the use
of person-generated health data (PGHD). PGHD holds significant potential for
clinical decision-making but remains challenging to manage. Objective: This
study aimed to enhance the clinical utilization of wearable health data by
developing the Validation and Inspection Tool for Armband-Based Lifelog Data
(VITAL), a pipeline for data integration, visualization, and quality management,
and evaluating its usability. Methods: The study followed a structured process
of requirement gathering, tool implementation, and usability evaluation.
Requirements were identified through input from four clinicians. Wearable health
data from Samsung, Apple, Fitbit, and Xiaomi devices were integrated into a
standardized dataframe at 10-minute intervals, focusing on biometrics, activity,
and sleep. Features of VITAL support data integration, visualization, and
quality management. Usability evaluation involved seven clinicians performing
tasks, completing the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT)
survey, and participating in interviews to identify usability issues. Results:
VITAL successfully integrated wearable data, thus enabling all participants to
complete tasks with minimal errors without prior participant training. UTAUT
survey results were positive, with average scores of 4.2 for performance
expectancy, 3.96 for effort expectancy, and 4.14 for intention to use,
indicating high user satisfaction and intent to adopt the tool. Conclusions: By
enhancing wearable data integration, visualization, and quality management, the
VITAL prototype shows significant potential for clinical application. Positive
feedback highlights its promise, while emphasizing the need for further studies
to confirm its real-world effectiveness.
