Title: Analysis of Security in OS-Level Virtualization
Authors: Krishna Sai Ketha, Guanqun Song, Ting Zhu
ID: 2501.01334
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.01334

Abstract:
Virtualization is a technique that allows multiple instances typically running
different guest operating systems on top of single physical hardware. A
hypervisor, a layer of software running on top of the host operating system,
typically runs and manages these different guest operating systems. Rather than
to run different services on different servers for reliability and security
reasons, companies started to employ virtualization over their servers to run
these services within a single server. This approach proves beneficial to the
companies as it provides much better reliability, stronger isolation, improved
security and resource utilization compared to running services on multiple
servers. Although hypervisor based virtualization offers better resource
utilization and stronger isolation, it also suffers from high overhead as the
host operating system has to maintain different guest operating systems. To
tackle this issue, another form of virtualization known as Operating
System-level virtualization has emerged. This virtualization provides
light-weight, minimal and efficient virtualization, as the different instances
are run on top of the same host operating system, sharing the resources of the
host operating system. But due to instances sharing the same host operating
system affects the isolation of the instances. In this paper, we will first
establish the basic concepts of virtualization and point out the differences
between the hyper-visor based virtualization and operating system-level
virtualization. Next, we will discuss the container creation life-cycle which
helps in forming a container threat model for the container systems, which
allows to map different potential attack vectors within these systems. Finally,
we will discuss a case study, which further looks at isolation provided by the
containers.
