Title: Investigating Issues that Lead to Code Technical Debt in Machine Learning Systems
Authors: Rodrigo Ximenes, Antonio Pedro Santos Alves, Tatiana Escovedo, Rodrigo Spinola, Marcos Kalinowski
ID: 2502.13011
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.13011

Abstract:
[Context] Technical debt (TD) in machine learning (ML) systems, much like its
counterpart in software engineering (SE), holds the potential to lead to future
rework, posing risks to productivity, quality, and team morale. Despite growing
attention to TD in SE, the understanding of ML-specific code-related TD remains
underexplored. [Objective] This paper aims to identify and discuss the relevance
of code-related issues that lead to TD in ML code throughout the ML workflow.
[Method] The study first compiled a list of 34 potential issues contributing to
TD in ML code by examining the phases of the ML workflow, their typical
associated activities, and problem types. This list was refined through two
focus group sessions involving nine experienced ML professionals, where each
issue was assessed based on its occurrence contributing to TD in ML code and its
relevance. [Results] The list of issues contributing to TD in the source code of
ML systems was refined from 34 to 30, with 24 of these issues considered highly
relevant. The data pre-processing phase was the most critical, with 14 issues
considered highly relevant. Shortcuts in code related to typical pre-processing
tasks (e.g., handling missing values, outliers, inconsistencies, scaling,
rebalancing, and feature selection) often result in "patch fixes" rather than
sustainable solutions, leading to the accumulation of TD and increasing
maintenance costs. Relevant issues were also found in the data collection, model
creation and training, and model evaluation phases. [Conclusion] We have made
the final list of issues available to the community and believe it will help
raise awareness about issues that need to be addressed throughout the ML
workflow to reduce TD and improve the maintainability of ML code.
