Title: The Formal Semantics and Implementation of a Domain-Specific Language for Mixed-Initiative Dialogs
Authors: Zachary S. Rowland, Saverio Perugini
ID: 2502.20529
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.20529

Abstract:
Human-computer dialog plays a prominent role in interactions conducted at kiosks
(e.g., withdrawing money from an atm or filling your car with gas), on
smartphones (e.g., installing and configuring apps), and on the web (e.g.,
booking a flight). Some human-computer dialogs involve an exchange of
system-initiated and user-initiated actions. These dialogs are called
*mixed-initiative dialogs* and sometimes also involve the pursuit of multiple
interleaved sub-dialogs, which are woven together in a manner akin to
coroutines. However, existing dialog-authoring languages have difficulty
expressing these dialogs concisely. In this work, we improve the expressiveness
of a dialog-authoring language we call *dialog specification language* (dsl),
which is based on the programming concepts of functional application, partial
function application, currying, and partial evaluation, by augmenting it with
additional abstractions to support concise specification of task-based,
mixed-initiative dialogs that resemble concurrently executing coroutines. We
also formalize the semantics of dsl -- the process of simplifying and staging
such dialogs specified in the language. We demonstrate that dialog
specifications are compressed by to a higher degree when written in dsl using
the new abstractions. We also operationalize the formal semantics of dsl in a
Haskell functional programming implementation. The Haskell implementation of the
simplification/staging rules provides a proof of concept that the formal
semantics are sufficient to implement a dialog system specified with the
language. We evaluate dsl from practical (i.e., case study), conceptual (i.e.,
comparisons to similar systems such as VoiceXML and State Chart XML), and
theoretical perspectives. The practical applicability of the new language
abstractions introduced in this work is demonstrated in a case study by using it
to model portions of an online food ordering system that can be concurrently
staged. Our results indicate that dsl enables concise representation of dialogs
composed of multiple concurrent sub-dialogs and improves the compression of
dialog expressions reported in prior research. We anticipate that the extension
of our language and the formalization of the semantics can facilitate concise
specification and smooth implementation of task-based, mixed-initiative,
human-computer dialog systems across various domains such as atms and
interactive, voice-response systems.
