Title: Accountability in Code Review: The Role of Intrinsic Drivers and the Impact of LLMs
Authors: Adam Alami, Victor Vadmand Jensen, Neil A. Ernst
ID: 2502.15963
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.15963

Abstract:
Accountability is an innate part of social systems. It maintains stability and
ensures positive pressure on individuals' decision-making. As actors in a social
system, software developers are accountable to their team and organization for
their decisions. However, the drivers of accountability and how it changes
behavior in software development are less understood. In this study, we look at
how the social aspects of code review affect software engineers' sense of
accountability for code quality. Since software engineering (SE) is increasingly
involving Large Language Models (LLM) assistance, we also evaluate the impact on
accountability when introducing LLM-assisted code reviews. We carried out a
two-phased sequential qualitative study (interviews -> focus groups). In Phase I
(16 interviews), we sought to investigate the intrinsic drivers of software
engineers influencing their sense of accountability for code quality, relying on
self-reported claims. In Phase II, we tested these traits in a more natural
setting by simulating traditional peer-led reviews with focus groups and then
LLM-assisted review sessions. We found that there are four key intrinsic drivers
of accountability for code quality: personal standards, professional integrity,
pride in code quality, and maintaining one's reputation. In a traditional
peer-led review, we observed a transition from individual to collective
accountability when code reviews are initiated. We also found that the
introduction of LLM-assisted reviews disrupts this accountability process,
challenging the reciprocity of accountability taking place in peer-led
evaluations, i.e., one cannot be accountable to an LLM. Our findings imply that
the introduction of AI into SE must preserve social integrity and collective
accountability mechanisms.
