Title: Innovating the software engineering class through multi-team development
Authors: Allan Brockenbrough
ID: 2502.02578
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.02578

Abstract:
Often software engineering classes have the student concentrate on designing and
planning the project but stop short of actual student team development of code.
This leads to criticism by employers of new graduates that they are missing
skills in working in teams and coordinating multiple overlapping changes to a
code base. Additionally, students that are not actively experiencing team
development are unprepared to understand and modify existing legacy-code bases
written by others. This paper presents a new approach to teaching undergraduate
software engineering that emphasizes not only software engineering methodology
but also experiencing development as a member of a team and modifying a legacy
code base. Our innovative software engineering course begins with learning the
fundamentals of software engineering, followed by examining an existing
framework of a social media application. The students are then grouped into
multiple software teams, each focusing on a different aspect of the app. The
separate teams must define requirements, design, and provide documentation on
the services. Using an Agile development approach, the teams incrementally add
to the code base and demonstrate features as the application evolves. Subsequent
iterations of the class pick up the prior students code base, providing
experience working with a legacy code base. Preliminary results of using this
approach at the university are presented in this paper including quantitative
analysis. Analysis of student software submissions to the cloud-based code
repository shows student engagement and contributions over the span of the
course. Positive student evaluations show the effectiveness of applying the
principles of software engineering to the development of a complex solution in a
team environment. Keywords: Software engineering, teaching, college computer
science, innovative methods, agile.
