Title: Secure Federated Data Distillation
Authors: Marco Arazzi, Mert Cihangiroglu, Serena Nicolazzo, Antonino Nocera
ID: 2502.13728
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.13728

Abstract:
Dataset Distillation (DD) is a powerful technique for reducing large datasets
into compact, representative synthetic datasets, accelerating Machine Learning
training. However, traditional DD methods operate in a centralized manner, which
poses significant privacy threats and reduces its applicability. To mitigate
these risks, we propose a Secure Federated Data Distillation (SFDD) framework to
decentralize the distillation process while preserving privacy. Unlike existing
Federated Distillation techniques that focus on training global models with
distilled knowledge, our approach aims to produce a distilled dataset without
exposing local contributions. We leverage the gradient-matching-based
distillation method, adapting it for a distributed setting where clients
contribute to the distillation process without sharing raw data. The central
aggregator iteratively refines a synthetic dataset by integrating client-side
updates while ensuring data confidentiality. To make our approach resilient to
inference attacks perpetrated by the server that could exploit gradient updates
to reconstruct private data, we create an optimized Local Differential Privacy
approach, called LDPO-RLD. Furthermore, we assess the framework's resilience
against malicious clients executing backdoor attacks (such as Doorping) and
demonstrate robustness under the assumption of a sufficient number of
participating clients. Our experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of
SFDD and that the proposed defense concretely mitigates the identified
vulnerabilities, with minimal impact on the performance of the distilled
dataset. By addressing the interplay between privacy and federation in dataset
distillation, this work advances the field of privacy-preserving Machine
Learning making our SFDD framework a viable solution for sensitive data-sharing
applications.
