Title: The TechDebt Game -- Enabling Discussions about Technical Debt
Authors: Marion Wiese, Angelina Heinrichs, Nino Rusieshvili, Rodrigo Rebouças de Almeida, Klara Borowa
ID: 2502.02174
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.02174

Abstract:
Context. Technical Debt (TD), defined as software constructs that are beneficial
in the short term but may hinder future change, is a frequently used term in
software development practice. Nevertheless, practitioners do not always fully
understand its definition and, in particular, conceptual model. Previous
research highlights that communication about TD is challenging, especially with
non-technical stakeholders. Discussions on this topic often cause conflicts due
to misunderstandings related to other stakeholders' perspectives. Goal. We
designed a board game to emulate TD concepts to make them tangible to all
stakeholders, including non-technical ones. The game aims to encourage
discussions about TD in an emulated and safe environment, thereby avoiding
real-life conflicts. Method. To evaluate the game's effectiveness, we surveyed
46 practitioners from diverse domains, positions, and experience levels who
played the game in 13 sessions following extensive testing during its
development. In addition to the players' general feedback, we examined
situations where players recognized new insights about TD or connected game
scenarios to real-life experiences. Results. Overall, the feedback on the game
and its enjoyment factor were highly positive. While developers and software
architects often connected game situations to their real-world experiences,
non-technical stakeholders, such as scrum masters, product owners, and less
experienced developers, encountered multiple new insights on TD. Numerous
players have shifted their attitudes toward TD and have outlined a plan to
modify their behavior regarding TD management. Conclusions. Although the game
may not lead to long-term behavior change among stakeholders, participants'
feedback provides evidence that it might serve as a valuable starting point for
team discussions on technical debt management.
