Title: Model-free front-to-end training of a large high performance laser neural network
Authors: Anas Skalli, Satoshi Sunada, Mirko Goldmann, Marcin Gebski, Stephan Reitzenstein et al.
ID: 2503.16943
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.16943

Abstract:
Artificial neural networks (ANNs), have become ubiquitous and revolutionized
many applications ranging from computer vision to medical diagnoses. However,
they offer a fundamentally connectionist and distributed approach to computing,
in stark contrast to classical computers that use the von Neumann architecture.
This distinction has sparked renewed interest in developing unconventional
hardware to support more efficient implementations of ANNs, rather than merely
emulating them on traditional systems. Photonics stands out as a particularly
promising platform, providing scalability, high speed, energy efficiency, and
the ability for parallel information processing. However, fully realized
autonomous optical neural networks (ONNs) with in-situ learning capabilities are
still rare. In this work, we demonstrate a fully autonomous and parallel ONN
using a multimode vertical cavity surface emitting laser (VCSEL) using
off-the-shelf components. Our ONN is highly efficient and is scalable both in
network size and inference bandwidth towards the GHz range. High performance
hardware-compatible optimization algorithms are necessary in order to minimize
reliance on external von Neumann computers to fully exploit the potential of
ONNs. As such we present and extensively study several algorithms which are
broadly compatible with a wide range of systems. We then apply these algorithms
to optimize our ONN, and benchmark them using the MNIST dataset. We show that
our ONN can achieve high accuracy and convergence efficiency, even under limited
hardware resources. Crucially, we compare these different algorithms in terms of
scaling and optimization efficiency in term of convergence time which is crucial
when working with limited external resources. Our work provides some guidance
for the design of future ONNs as well as a simple and flexible way to train
them.
