Title: Conceptual Entity-Relationship Model: Underneath the Simplicity and Staticity
Authors: Sabah Al-Fedaghi
ID: 2503.06155
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.06155

Abstract:
This paper deals with the issue of conceptual models role in capturing semantics
and aligning them to serve the remaining development phases of systems design.
Specifically, the entity-relationship (ER) model is selected as an example of
conceptual representation that serves this purpose in building relational
database systems. It is claimed that ER diagrams provide a solid basis for
subsequent technical implementation. The ER model appeal relies on its
simplicity and its benefit in clarifying the requirements for databases.
Nevertheless, some researchers have observed that this reduction of complexity
is accompanied by oversimplification and overlooking dynamism. Accordingly,
complaints have risen about the lack of direct compatibility between ER modeling
and relational model. This paper is an attempt to explore what is beneath this
static ER simplicity and its role as a base for subsequent technical
implementation. In this undertaking, we use thinging machines (TMs), where
modeling is constructed upon a single notion thimac (thing/machine). Thimac
constituents are formed from the makeup of five actions, create, process,
release, transfer, and receive that inject dynamism alongside with structure.
The ER entities, attributes, and relationship are modeled as thimacs.
Accordingly, in this paper, ER examples are remodeled in TM while identifying TM
portions that correspond to ER components. The resulting TM model insets actions
into entities, attributes and relationships. In this case, relationships are the
products of creating linking thimacs plus the logic of constructing them. Based
on such static/dynamic TM representation, the modeler can produce any level of
simplification, including the original ER model. In conclusion, results
indicated that the TM models facilitate multilevel simplicity and viable direct
compatibility with the relational database model.
