Title: PERC: a suite of software tools for the curation of cryoEM data with application to simulation, modelling and machine learning
Authors: Beatriz Costa-Gomes, Joel Greer, Nikolai Juraschko, James Parkhurst, Jola Mirecka et al.
ID: 2503.13329
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.13329

Abstract:
Ease of access to data, tools and models expedites scientific research. In
structural biology there are now numerous open repositories of experimental and
simulated datasets. Being able to easily access and utilise these is crucial for
allowing researchers to make optimal use of their research effort. The tools
presented here are useful for collating existing public cryoEM datasets and/or
creating new synthetic cryoEM datasets to aid the development of novel data
processing and interpretation algorithms. In recent years, structural biology
has seen the development of a multitude of machine-learning based algorithms for
aiding numerous steps in the processing and reconstruction of experimental
datasets and the use of these approaches has become widespread. Developing such
techniques in structural biology requires access to large datasets which can be
cumbersome to curate and unwieldy to make use of. In this paper we present a
suite of Python software packages which we collectively refer to as PERC
(profet, EMPIARreader and CAKED). These are designed to reduce the burden which
data curation places upon structural biology research. The protein structure
fetcher (profet) package allows users to conveniently download and cleave
sequences or structures from the Protein Data Bank or Alphafold databases.
EMPIARreader allows lazy loading of Electron Microscopy Public Image Archive
datasets in a machine-learning compatible structure. The Class Aggregator for
Key Electron-microscopy Data (CAKED) package is designed to seamlessly
facilitate the training of machine learning models on electron microscopy data,
including electron-cryo-microscopy-specific data augmentation and labelling.
These packages may be utilised independently or as building blocks in workflows.
All are available in open source repositories and designed to be easily
extensible to facilitate more advanced workflows if required.
