Title: Evolutionary Defense: Advancing Moving Target Strategies with Bio-Inspired Reinforcement Learning to Secure Misconfigured Software Applications
Authors: Niloofar Heidarikohol, Shuvalaxmi Dass, Akbar Siami Namin
ID: 2504.09465
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.09465

Abstract:
Improper configurations in software systems often create vulnerabilities,
leaving them open to exploitation. Static architectures exacerbate this issue by
allowing misconfigurations to persist, providing adversaries with opportunities
to exploit them during attacks. To address this challenge, a dynamic proactive
defense strategy known as Moving Target Defense (MTD) can be applied. MTD
continually changes the attack surface of the system, thwarting potential
threats. In the previous research, we developed a proof of concept for a
single-player MTD game model called RL-MTD, which utilizes Reinforcement
Learning (RL) to generate dynamic secure configurations. While the model
exhibited satisfactory performance in generating secure configurations, it
grappled with an unoptimized and sparse search space, leading to performance
issues. To tackle this obstacle, this paper addresses the search space
optimization problem by leveraging two bio-inspired search algorithms: Genetic
Algorithm (GA) and Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO). Additionally, we extend
our base RL-MTD model by integrating these algorithms, resulting in the creation
of PSO-RL andGA-RL. We compare the performance of three models: base RL-MTD,
GA-RL, and PSO-RL, across four misconfigured SUTs in terms of generating the
most secure configuration. Results show that the optimal search space derived
from both GA-RL and PSO-RL significantly enhances the performance of the base
RL-MTD model compared to the version without optimized search space. While both
GA-RL and PSO-RL demonstrate effective search capabilities, PSO-RL slightly
outperforms GA-RL for most SUTs. Overall, both algorithms excel in seeking an
optimal search space which in turn improves the performance of the model in
generating optimal secure configuration.
