Title: LRASGen: LLM-based RESTful API Specification Generation
Authors: Sida Deng, Rubing Huang, Man Zhang, Chenhui Cui, Dave Towey et al.
ID: 2504.16833
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.16833

Abstract:
REpresentation State Transfer (REST) is an architectural style for designing web
applications that enable scalable, stateless communication between clients and
servers via common HTTP techniques. Web APIs that employ the REST style are
known as RESTful (or REST) APIs. When using or testing a RESTful API, developers
may need to employ its specification, which is often defined by open-source
standards such as the OpenAPI Specification (OAS). However, it can be very
time-consuming and error-prone to write and update these specifications, which
may negatively impact the use of RESTful APIs, especially when the software
requirements change. Many tools and methods have been proposed to solve this
problem, such as Respector and Swagger Core. OAS generation can be regarded as a
common text-generation task that creates a formal description of API endpoints
derived from the source code. A potential solution for this may involve using
Large Language Models (LLMs), which have strong capabilities in both code
understanding and text generation. Motivated by this, we propose a novel
approach for generating the OASs of RESTful APIs using LLMs: LLM-based RESTful
API-Specification Generation (LRASGen). To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first use of LLMs and API source code to generate OASs for RESTful APIs.
Compared with existing tools and methods, LRASGen can generate the OASs, even
when the implementation is incomplete (with partial code, and/or missing
annotations/comments, etc.). To evaluate the LRASGen performance, we conducted a
series of empirical studies on 20 real-world RESTful APIs. The results show that
two LLMs (GPT-4o mini and DeepSeek V3) can both support LARSGen to generate
accurate specifications, and LRASGen-generated specifications cover an average
of 48.85% more missed entities than the developer-provided specifications.
