Title: Incubation and Beyond: A Comparative Analysis of ASF Projects Sustainability Impacts on Software Quality
Authors: Adam Alami, Steffan Klockmann, Lasse Rehder Sørensen, Raúl Pardo, Johan Linåker
ID: 2504.09468
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.09468

Abstract:
Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) communities' sustainability, meaning to
remain operational without signs of weakening or interruptions to its
development, is fundamental for the resilience and continuity of society's
digital infrastructure. Many digital services and products either leverage or
entirely rely on FOSS in their software stack. FOSS sustainability is a
multifaceted concept, and the impact of its decline on community products is
less known. In this study, we sought to understand how the different aspects of
FOSS sustainability impact software quality from a life-cycle perspective.
Specifically, we investigate whether and how support and incubation of FOSS
projects or bypassing incubation correlate with software quality outcomes. We
selected 342 FOSS projects from the Apache Software Foundation that have either
graduated, retired, or bypassed their incubator program. We used 16
sustainability metrics to examine their impact on eight software quality
metrics. Using Bayesian data analysis, we found that our selected sustainability
metrics exhibit distinct relationships with software quality across different
project trajectories. Graduated projects showed the strongest
sustainability-software quality (SWQ) relationship, both during and
post-incubation. In contrast, retired projects showed weaker relationships,
despite receiving similar governance support. Bypassed projects, while not
outperforming graduated ones, showed comparable sustainability-SWQ
relationships. While structured incubation strengthens sustainability and SWQ in
graduated projects, retired projects struggle to maintain strong
sustainability-SWQ relationships, indicating that additional factors internal
and specific to projects influence sustainability. This effect was evident among
bypassed projects; their self-reliant sustainability practices yielded stronger
sustainability-SWQ compared to the retired ones.
