Title: Understanding Codebase like a Professional! Human-AI Collaboration for Code Comprehension
Authors: Jie Gao, Yue Xue, Xiaofei Xie, SoeMin Thant, Erika Lee et al.
ID: 2504.04553
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.04553

Abstract:
Understanding an unfamiliar codebase is an essential task for developers in
various scenarios, such as during the onboarding process. Especially when the
codebase is large and time is limited, achieving a decent level of comprehension
remains challenging for both experienced and novice developers, even with the
assistance of LLMs. Existing studies have shown that LLMs often fail to support
users in understanding code structures or to provide user-centered, adaptive,
and dynamic assistance in real-world settings. To address this, we propose
learning from the perspective of a unique role, code auditors, whose work often
requires them to quickly familiarize themselves with new code projects on a
weekly or even daily basis. To achieve this, we recruited and interviewed 8 code
auditing practitioners to understand how they master codebase understanding. We
identified four design opportunities for an LLM-based codebase understanding
system: supporting cognitive alignment through automated codebase information
extraction, decomposition, and representation, as well as reducing manual effort
and conversational distraction through interaction design. To validate these
four design opportunities, we designed a system prototype, CodeMap, that
provides dynamic information extraction and representation aligned with the
human cognitive flow and enables interactive switching among hierarchical
codebase visualizations. We then conducted a user study with nine experienced
developers and six novice developers. Our results demonstrate that CodeMap
significantly improved users' perceived intuitiveness, ease of use, and
usefulness in supporting code comprehension, while reducing their reliance on
reading and interpreting LLM responses by 79% and increasing map usage time by
90% compared to the static visualization analysis tool.
