Title: Extracting Formal Specifications from Documents Using LLMs for Automated Testing
Authors: Hui Li, Zhen Dong, Siao Wang, Hui Zhang, Liwei Shen et al.
ID: 2504.01294
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.01294

Abstract:
Automated testing plays a crucial role in ensuring software security. It heavily
relies on formal specifications to validate the correctness of the system
behavior. However, the main approach to defining these formal specifications is
through manual analysis of software documents, which requires a significant
amount of engineering effort from experienced researchers and engineers.
Meanwhile, system update further increases the human labor cost to maintain a
corresponding formal specification, making the manual analysis approach a
time-consuming and error-prone task. Recent advances in Large Language Models
(LLMs) have demonstrated promising capabilities in natural language
understanding. Yet, the feasibility of using LLMs to automate the extraction of
formal specifications from software documents remains unexplored. We conduct an
empirical study by constructing a comprehensive dataset comprising 603
specifications from 37 documents across three representative open-source
software. We then evaluate the most recent LLMs' capabilities in extracting
formal specifications from documents in an end-to-end fashion, including GPT-4o,
Claude, and Llama. Our study demonstrates the application of LLMs in formal
specification extraction tasks while identifying two major limitations:
specification oversimplification and specification fabrication. We attribute
these deficiencies to the LLMs' inherent limitations in processing and
expressive capabilities, as well as their tendency to fabricate fictional
information. Inspired by human cognitive processes, we propose a two-stage
method, annotation-then-conversion, to address these challenges. Our method
demonstrates significant improvements over the end-to-end method, with a 29.2%
increase in the number of correctly extracted specifications and a 14.0%
improvement in average accuracy. In particular, our best-performing LLM achieves
an accuracy of 71.6%.
