Title: Exploring human-SAV interaction using LLMs: The impact of psychological factors on user experience
Authors: Lirui Guo, Michael G. Burke, Wynita M. Griggs
ID: 2504.16548
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.16548

Abstract:
There has been extensive prior work exploring how psychological factors such as
anthropomorphism affect the adoption of Shared Autonomous Vehicles (SAVs).
However, limited research has been conducted on how prompt strategies in large
language models (LLM)-powered conversational SAV agents affect users'
perceptions, experiences, and intentions to adopt such technology. In this work,
we investigate how conversational SAV agents powered by LLMs drive these
psychological factors, such as psychological ownership, the sense of possession
a user may come to feel towards an entity or object they may not legally own. We
designed four SAV agents with varying levels of anthropomorphic characteristics
and psychological ownership triggers. Quantitative measures of psychological
ownership, anthropomorphism, quality of service, disclosure tendency, sentiment
of SAV responses, and overall acceptance were collected after participants
interacted with each SAV. Qualitative feedback was also gathered regarding the
experience of psychological ownership during the interactions. The results
indicate that an SAV designed to be more anthropomorphic and to induce
psychological ownership improved users' perceptions of the SAV's human-like
qualities, and its responses were perceived as more positive but also more
subjective compared to the control conditions. Qualitative findings support
established routes to psychological ownership in the SAV context and suggest
that the conversational agent's perceived performance may also influence
psychological ownership. Both quantitative and qualitative outcomes highlight
the importance of personalization in designing effective SAV interactions. These
findings provide practical guidance for designing conversational SAV agents that
enhance user experience and adoption.
