Title: Scalability of Reinforcement Learning Methods for Dispatching in Semiconductor Frontend Fabs: A Comparison of Open-Source Models with Real Industry Datasets
Authors: Patrick Stöckermann, Henning Südfeld, Alessandro Immordino, Thomas Altenmüller, Marc Wegmann et al.
ID: 2505.11135
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.11135

Abstract:
Benchmark datasets are crucial for evaluating approaches to scheduling or
dispatching in the semiconductor industry during the development and deployment
phases. However, commonly used benchmark datasets like the Minifab or SMT2020
lack the complex details and constraints found in real-world scenarios. To
mitigate this shortcoming, we compare open-source simulation models with a real
industry dataset to evaluate how optimization methods scale with different
levels of complexity. Specifically, we focus on Reinforcement Learning methods,
performing optimization based on policy-gradient and Evolution Strategies. Our
research provides insights into the effectiveness of these optimization methods
and their applicability to realistic semiconductor frontend fab simulations. We
show that our proposed Evolution Strategies-based method scales much better than
a comparable policy-gradient-based approach. Moreover, we identify the selection
and combination of relevant bottleneck tools to control by the agent as crucial
for an efficient optimization. For the generalization across different loading
scenarios and stochastic tool failure patterns, we achieve advantages when
utilizing a diverse training dataset. While the overall approach is
computationally expensive, it manages to scale well with the number of CPU cores
used for training. For the real industry dataset, we achieve an improvement of
up to 4% regarding tardiness and up to 1% regarding throughput. For the less
complex open-source models Minifab and SMT2020, we observe double-digit
percentage improvement in tardiness and single digit percentage improvement in
throughput by use of Evolution Strategies.
