Title: VulBinLLM: LLM-powered Vulnerability Detection for Stripped Binaries
Authors: Nasir Hussain, Haohan Chen, Chanh Tran, Philip Huang, Zhuohao Li et al.
ID: 2505.22010
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.22010

Abstract:
Recognizing vulnerabilities in stripped binary files presents a significant
challenge in software security. Although some progress has been made in
generating human-readable information from decompiled binary files with Large
Language Models (LLMs), effectively and scalably detecting vulnerabilities
within these binary files is still an open problem. This paper explores the
novel application of LLMs to detect vulnerabilities within these binary files.
We demonstrate the feasibility of identifying vulnerable programs through a
combined approach of decompilation optimization to make the vulnerabilities more
prominent and long-term memory for a larger context window, achieving
state-of-the-art performance in binary vulnerability analysis. Our findings
highlight the potential for LLMs to overcome the limitations of traditional
analysis methods and advance the field of binary vulnerability detection, paving
the way for more secure software systems. In this paper, we present Vul-BinLLM ,
an LLM-based framework for binary vulnerability detection that mirrors
traditional binary analysis workflows with fine-grained optimizations in
decompilation and vulnerability reasoning with an extended context. In the
decompilation phase, Vul-BinLLM adds vulnerability and weakness comments without
altering the code structure or functionality, providing more contextual
information for vulnerability reasoning later. Then for vulnerability reasoning,
Vul-BinLLM combines in-context learning and chain-of-thought prompting along
with a memory management agent to enhance accuracy. Our evaluations encompass
the commonly used synthetic dataset Juliet to evaluate the potential feasibility
for analysis and vulnerability detection in C/C++ binaries. Our evaluations show
that Vul-BinLLM is highly effective in detecting vulnerabilities on the compiled
Juliet dataset.
