Title: Your Build Scripts Stink: The State of Code Smells in Build Scripts
Authors: Mahzabin Tamanna, Yash Chandrani, Matthew Burrows, Brandon Wroblewski, Laurie Williams et al.
ID: 2506.17948
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.17948

Abstract:
Build scripts automate the process of compiling source code, managing
dependencies, running tests, and packaging software into deployable artifacts.
These scripts are ubiquitous in modern software development pipelines for
streamlining testing and delivery. While developing build scripts, practitioners
may inadvertently introduce code smells, which are recurring patterns of poor
coding practices that may lead to build failures or increase risk and technical
debt. The goal of this study is to aid practitioners in avoiding code smells in
build scripts through an empirical study of build scripts and issues on
GitHub.We employed a mixed-methods approach, combining qualitative and
quantitative analysis. First, we conducted a qualitative analysis of 2000
build-script-related GitHub issues to understand recurring smells. Next, we
developed a static analysis tool, Sniffer, to automatically detect code smells
in 5882 build scripts of Maven, Gradle, CMake, and Make files, collected from
4877 open-source GitHub repositories. To assess Sniffer's performance, we
conducted a user study, where Sniffer achieved higher precision, recall, and
F-score. We identified 13 code smell categories, with a total of 10,895 smell
occurrences, where 3184 were in Maven, 1214 in Gradle, 337 in CMake, and 6160 in
Makefiles. Our analysis revealed that Insecure URLs were the most prevalent code
smell in Maven build scripts, while HardcodedPaths/URLs were commonly observed
in both Gradle and CMake scripts. Wildcard Usage emerged as the most frequent
smell in Makefiles. The co-occurrence analysis revealed strong associations
between specific smell pairs of Hardcoded Paths/URLs with Duplicates, and
Inconsistent Dependency Management with Empty or Incomplete Tags, which indicate
potential underlying issues in the build script structure and maintenance
practices.
