Title: Predictive Analytics for Collaborators Answers, Code Quality, and Dropout on Stack Overflow
Authors: Elijah Zolduoarrati, Sherlock A. Licorish, Nigel Stanger
ID: 2506.18329
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.18329

Abstract:
Previous studies that used data from Stack Overflow to develop predictive models
often employed limited benchmarks of 3-5 models or adopted arbitrary selection
methods. Despite being insightful, their limited scope suggests the need to
benchmark more models to avoid overlooking untested algorithms. Our study
evaluates 21 algorithms across three tasks: predicting the number of question a
user is likely to answer, their code quality violations, and their dropout
status. We employed normalisation, standardisation, as well as logarithmic and
power transformations paired with Bayesian hyperparameter optimisation and
genetic algorithms. CodeBERT, a pre-trained language model for both natural and
programming languages, was fine-tuned to classify user dropout given their posts
(questions and answers) and code snippets. We found Bagging ensemble models
combined with standardisation achieved the highest R2 value (0.821) in
predicting user answers. The Stochastic Gradient Descent regressor, followed by
Bagging and Epsilon Support Vector Machine models, consistently demonstrated
superior performance to other benchmarked algorithms in predicting user code
quality across multiple quality dimensions and languages. Extreme Gradient
Boosting paired with log-transformation exhibited the highest F1-score (0.825)
in predicting user dropout. CodeBERT was able to classify user dropout with a
final F1-score of 0.809, validating the performance of Extreme Gradient Boosting
that was solely based on numerical data. Overall, our benchmarking of 21
algorithms provides multiple insights. Researchers can leverage findings
regarding the most suitable models for specific target variables, and
practitioners can utilise the identified optimal hyperparameters to reduce the
initial search space during their own hyperparameter tuning processes.
