Title: Is Your Automated Software Engineer Trustworthy?
Authors: Noble Saji Mathews, Meiyappan Nagappan
ID: 2506.17812
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.17812

Abstract:
Large Language Models (LLMs) are being increasingly used in software engineering
tasks, with an increased focus on bug report resolution over the past year.
However, most proposed systems fail to properly handle uncertain or incorrect
inputs and outputs. Existing LLM-based tools and coding agents respond to every
issue and generate a patch for every case, even when the input is vague or their
own output is incorrect. There are no mechanisms in place to abstain when
confidence is low. This leads to unreliable behaviour, such as hallucinated code
changes or responses based on vague issue reports. We introduce BouncerBench, a
benchmark that evaluates whether LLM-based software agents can refuse to act
when inputs are ill-defined or refuse to respond when their own outputs are
likely to be incorrect. Unlike prior benchmarks that implicitly incentivize
models to generate responses even when uncertain, BouncerBench aims to improve
precision by targeting two overlooked failure points: (1) vague or
underspecified issue descriptions in tickets and (2) logically or functionally
incorrect code patches created by the system. It measures whether proposed
systems can distinguish actionable issues from vague tickets and valid patches
from untrustworthy ones. We also implement a basic input and output bouncer,
evaluating how well current LLMs can abstain when needed. Our results show that
most models fail to abstain from underspecified inputs or incorrect outputs.
Hence, we conclude that there is significant room for improvement before LLMs
can be trusted to make correct decisions and recommendations in real-world
software engineering workflows. BouncerBench provides a first step toward
evaluating and building more cautious, trustworthy code agents. The replication
package, dataset, and leaderboard can be found at bouncerbench.com
