Title: Measuring how changes in code readability attributes affect code quality evaluation by Large Language Models
Authors: Igor Regis da Silva Simoes, Elaine Venson
ID: 2507.05289
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.05289

Abstract:
Code readability is one of the main aspects of code quality, influenced by
various properties like identifier names, comments, code structure, and
adherence to standards. However, measuring this attribute poses challenges in
both industry and academia. While static analysis tools assess attributes such
as code smells and comment percentage, code reviews introduce an element of
subjectivity. This paper explores using Large Language Models (LLMs) to evaluate
code quality attributes related to its readability in a standardized,
reproducible, and consistent manner. We conducted a quasi-experiment study to
measure the effects of code changes on Large Language Model (LLM)s
interpretation regarding its readability quality attribute. Nine LLMs were
tested, undergoing three interventions: removing comments, replacing identifier
names with obscure names, and refactoring to remove code smells. Each
intervention involved 10 batch analyses per LLM, collecting data on response
variability. We compared the results with a known reference model and tool. The
results showed that all LLMs were sensitive to the interventions, with agreement
with the reference classifier being high for the original and refactored code
scenarios. The LLMs demonstrated a strong semantic sensitivity that the
reference model did not fully capture. A thematic analysis of the LLMs reasoning
confirmed their evaluations directly reflected the nature of each intervention.
The models also exhibited response variability, with 9.37% to 14.58% of
executions showing a standard deviation greater than zero, indicating response
oscillation, though this did not always compromise the statistical significance
of the results. LLMs demonstrated potential for evaluating semantic quality
aspects, such as coherence between identifier names, comments, and documentation
with code purpose.
