Title: MAAD: Automate Software Architecture Design through Knowledge-Driven Multi-Agent Collaboration
Authors: Ruiyin Li, Yiran Zhang, Xiyu Zhou, Peng Liang, Weisong Sun et al.
ID: 2507.21382
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.21382

Abstract:
Software architecture design is a critical, yet inherently complex and
knowledge-intensive phase of software development. It requires deep domain
expertise, development experience, architectural knowledge, careful trade-offs
among competing quality attributes, and the ability to adapt to evolving
requirements. Traditionally, this process is time-consuming and labor-intensive,
and relies heavily on architects, often resulting in limited design
alternatives, especially under the pressures of agile development. While Large
Language Model (LLM)-based agents have shown promising performance across
various SE tasks, their application to architecture design remains relatively
scarce and requires more exploration, particularly in light of diverse domain
knowledge and complex decision-making. To address the challenges, we proposed
MAAD (Multi-Agent Architecture Design), an automated framework that employs a
knowledge-driven Multi-Agent System (MAS) for architecture design. MAAD
orchestrates four specialized agents (i.e., Analyst, Modeler, Designer and
Evaluator) to collaboratively interpret requirements specifications and produce
architectural blueprints enriched with quality attributes-based evaluation
reports. We then evaluated MAAD through a case study and comparative experiments
against MetaGPT, a state-of-the-art MAS baseline. Our results show that MAAD's
superiority lies in generating comprehensive architectural components and
delivering insightful and structured architecture evaluation reports. Feedback
from industrial architects across 11 requirements specifications further
reinforces MAAD's practical usability. We finally explored the performance of
the MAAD framework with three LLMs (GPT-4o, DeepSeek-R1, and Llama 3.3) and
found that GPT-4o exhibits better performance in producing architecture design,
emphasizing the importance of LLM selection in MAS-driven architecture design.
