Title: Decision Models for Selecting Architecture Patterns and Strategies in Quantum Software Systems
Authors: Mst Shamima Aktar, Peng Liang, Muhammad Waseem, Amjed Tahir, Mojtaba Shahin et al.
ID: 2507.11671
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.11671

Abstract:
Quantum software represents disruptive technologies in terms of quantum-specific
software systems, services, and applications - leverage the principles of
quantum mechanics via programmable quantum bits (Qubits) that manipulate quantum
gates (QuGates) - to achieve quantum supremacy in computing. Quantum software
architecture enables quantum software developers to abstract away
implementation-specific details (i.e., mapping of Qubits and QuGates to
high-level architectural components and connectors). Architectural patterns and
strategies can provide reusable knowledge and best practices to engineer quantum
software systems effectively and efficiently. However, quantum software
practitioners face significant challenges in selecting and implementing
appropriate patterns and strategies due to the complexity of quantum software
systems and the lack of guidelines. To address these challenges, this study
proposes decision models for selecting patterns and strategies in six critical
design areas in quantum software systems: Communication, Decomposition, Data
Processing, Fault Tolerance, Integration and Optimization, and Algorithm
Implementation. These decision models are constructed based on data collected
from both a mining study (i.e., GitHub and Stack Exchange) and a Systematic
Literature Review, which were used to identify relevant patterns and strategies
with their involved Quality Attributes (QAs). We then conducted semi-structured
interviews with 16 quantum software practitioners to evaluate the familiarity,
understandability, completeness, and usefulness of the proposed decision models.
The results show that the proposed decision models can aid practitioners in
selecting suitable patterns and strategies to address the challenges related to
the architecture design of quantum software systems. The dataset is available at
[6], allowing the community to reproduce and build upon our findings.
