Title: VISION: Robust and Interpretable Code Vulnerability Detection Leveraging Counterfactual Augmentation
Authors: David Egea, Barproda Halder, Sanghamitra Dutta
ID: 2508.18933
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.18933

Abstract:
Automated detection of vulnerabilities in source code is an essential
cybersecurity challenge, underpinning trust in digital systems and services.
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged as a promising approach as they can
learn structural and logical code relationships in a data-driven manner.
However, their performance is severely constrained by training data imbalances
and label noise. GNNs often learn 'spurious' correlations from superficial code
similarities, producing detectors that fail to generalize well to unseen
real-world data. In this work, we propose a unified framework for robust and
interpretable vulnerability detection, called VISION, to mitigate spurious
correlations by systematically augmenting a counterfactual training dataset.
Counterfactuals are samples with minimal semantic modifications but opposite
labels. Our framework includes: (i) generating counterfactuals by prompting a
Large Language Model (LLM); (ii) targeted GNN training on paired code examples
with opposite labels; and (iii) graph-based interpretability to identify the
crucial code statements relevant for vulnerability predictions while ignoring
spurious ones. We find that VISION reduces spurious learning and enables more
robust, generalizable detection, improving overall accuracy (from 51.8% to
97.8%), pairwise contrast accuracy (from 4.5% to 95.8%), and worst-group
accuracy (from 0.7% to 85.5%) on the Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE)-20
vulnerability. We further demonstrate gains using proposed metrics: intra-class
attribution variance, inter-class attribution distance, and node score
dependency. We also release CWE-20-CFA, a benchmark of 27,556 functions (real
and counterfactual) from the high-impact CWE-20 category. Finally, VISION
advances transparent and trustworthy AI-based cybersecurity systems through
interactive visualization for human-in-the-loop analysis.
