Title: DeputyDev -- AI Powered Developer Assistant: Breaking the Code Review Logjam through Contextual AI to Boost Developer Productivity
Authors: Vishal Khare, Vijay Saini, Deepak Sharma, Anand Kumar, Ankit Rana et al.
ID: 2508.09676
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.09676

Abstract:
This study investigates the implementation and efficacy of DeputyDev, an
AI-powered code review assistant developed to address inefficiencies in the
software development process. The process of code review is highly inefficient
for several reasons, such as it being a time-consuming process, inconsistent
feedback, and review quality not being at par most of the time. Using our
telemetry data, we observed that at TATA 1mg, pull request (PR) processing
exhibits significant inefficiencies, with average pick-up and review times of 73
and 82 hours, respectively, resulting in a 6.2 day closure cycle. The review
cycle was marked by prolonged iterative communication between the reviewing and
submitting parties. Research from the University of California, Irvine indicates
that interruptions can lead to an average of 23 minutes of lost focus,
critically affecting code quality and timely delivery. To address these
challenges, we developed DeputyDev's PR review capabilities by providing
automated, contextual code reviews. We conducted a rigorous double-controlled
A/B experiment involving over 200 engineers to evaluate DeputyDev's impact on
review times. The results demonstrated a statistically significant reduction in
both average per PR (23.09%) and average per-line-of-code (40.13%) review
durations. After implementing safeguards to exclude outliers, DeputyDev has been
effectively rolled out across the entire organisation. Additionally, it has been
made available to external companies as a Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) solution,
currently supporting the daily work of numerous engineering professionals. This
study explores the implementation and effectiveness of AI-assisted code reviews
in improving development workflow timelines and code.
