Title: Large Language Models (LLMs) for Requirements Engineering (RE): A Systematic Literature Review
Authors: Mohammad Amin Zadenoori, Jacek Dąbrowski, Waad Alhoshan, Liping Zhao, Alessio Ferrari
ID: 2509.11446
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.11446

Abstract:
Large Language Models (LLMs) are finding applications in numerous domains, and
Requirements Engineering (RE) is increasingly benefiting from their capabilities
to assist with complex, language-intensive tasks. This paper presents a
systematic literature review of 74 primary studies published between 2023 and
2024, examining how LLMs are being applied in RE. The study categorizes the
literature according to several dimensions, including publication trends, RE
activities, prompting strategies, and evaluation methods. Our findings indicate
notable patterns, among which we observe substantial differences compared to
previous works leveraging standard Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques.
Most of the studies focus on using LLMs for requirements elicitation and
validation, rather than defect detection and classification, which were dominant
in the past. Researchers have also broadened their focus and addressed novel
tasks, e.g., test generation, exploring the integration of RE with other
software engineering (SE) disciplines. Although requirements specifications
remain the primary focus, other artifacts are increasingly considered, including
issues from issue tracking systems, regulations, and technical manuals. The
studies mostly rely on GPT-based models, and often use Zero-shot or Few-shot
prompting. They are usually evaluated in controlled environments, with limited
use in industry settings and limited integration in complex workflows. Our study
outlines important future directions, such as leveraging the potential to expand
the influence of RE in SE, exploring less-studied tasks, improving prompting
methods, and testing in real-world environments. Our contribution also helps
researchers and practitioners use LLMs more effectively in RE, by providing a
list of identified tools leveraging LLMs for RE, as well as datasets.
