Title: An Integrated Open Source Software System for the Generation and Analysis of Subject-Specific Blood Flow Simulation Ensembles
Authors: Simon Leistikow, Thomas Miro, Adrian Kummerländer, Ali Nahardani, Katja Grün et al.
ID: 2509.09392
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.09392

Abstract:
Background and Objective: Hemodynamic analysis of blood flow through arteries
and veins is critical for diagnosing cardiovascular diseases, such as aneurysms
and stenoses, and for investigating cardiovascular parameters, such as
turbulence and wall shear stress. For subject-specific analyses, the anatomy and
blood flow of the subject can be captured non-invasively using structural and 4D
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD), on the
other hand, can be used to generate blood flow simulations by solving the
Navier-Stokes equations. To generate and analyze subject-specific blood flow
simulations, MRI and CFD have to be brought together. Methods: We present an
interactive, customizable, and user-oriented visual analysis tool that assists
researchers in both medicine and numerical analysis. Our open-source tool is
applicable to domains such as CFD and MRI, and it facilitates the analysis of
simulation results and medical data, especially in hemodynamic studies. It
enables the creation of simulation ensembles with a high variety of parameters.
Furthermore, it allows for the visual and analytical examination of simulations
and measurements through 2D embeddings of the similarity space. Results: To
demonstrate the effectiveness of our tool, we applied it to three real-world use
cases, showcasing its ability to configure simulation ensembles and analyse
blood flow dynamics. We evaluated our example cases together with MRI and CFD
experts to further enhance features and increase the usability. Conclusions: By
combining the strengths of both CFD and MRI, our tool provides a more
comprehensive understanding of hemodynamic parameters, facilitating more
accurate analysis of hemodynamic biomarkers.
