Title: Investigating The Smells of LLM Generated Code
Authors: Debalina Ghosh Paul, Hong Zhu, Ian Bayley
ID: 2510.03029
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.03029

Abstract:
Context: Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly being used to generate
program code. Much research has been reported on the functional correctness of
generated code, but there is far less on code quality. Objectives: In this
study, we propose a scenario-based method of evaluating the quality of
LLM-generated code to identify the weakest scenarios in which the quality of LLM
generated code should be improved. Methods: The method measures code smells, an
important indicator of code quality, and compares them with a baseline formed
from reference solutions of professionally written code. The test dataset is
divided into various subsets according to the topics of the code and complexity
of the coding tasks to represent different scenarios of using LLMs for code
generation. We will also present an automated test system for this purpose and
report experiments with the Java programs generated in response to prompts given
to four state-of-the-art LLMs: Gemini Pro, ChatGPT, Codex, and Falcon. Results:
We find that LLM-generated code has a higher incidence of code smells compared
to reference solutions. Falcon performed the least badly, with a smell increase
of 42.28%, followed by Gemini Pro (62.07%), ChatGPT (65.05%) and finally Codex
(84.97%). The average smell increase across all LLMs was 63.34%, comprising
73.35% for implementation smells and 21.42% for design smells. We also found
that the increase in code smells is greater for more complex coding tasks and
for more advanced topics, such as those involving object-orientated concepts.
Conclusion: In terms of code smells, LLM's performances on various coding task
complexities and topics are highly correlated to the quality of human written
code in the corresponding scenarios. However, the quality of LLM generated code
is noticeably poorer than human written code.
