Title: Privacy by Design: Aligning GDPR and Software Engineering Specifications with a Requirements Engineering Approach
Authors: Oleksandr Kosenkov, Ehsan Zabardast, Davide Fucci, Daniel Mendez, Michael Unterkalmsteiner
ID: 2510.21591
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.21591

Abstract:
Context: Consistent requirements and system specifications are essential for the
compliance of software systems towards the General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR). Both artefacts need to be grounded in the original text and conjointly
assure the achievement of privacy by design (PbD). Objectives: There is little
understanding of the perspectives of practitioners on specification objectives
and goals to address PbD. Existing approaches do not account for the complex
intersection between problem and solution space expressed in GDPR. In this study
we explore the demand for conjoint requirements and system specification for PbD
and suggest an approach to address this demand. Methods: We reviewed secondary
and related primary studies and conducted interviews with practitioners to (1)
investigate the state-of-practice and (2) understand the underlying
specification objectives and goals (e.g., traceability). We developed and
evaluated an approach for requirements and systems specification for PbD, and
evaluated it against the specification objectives. Results: The relationship
between problem and solution space, as expressed in GDPR, is instrumental in
supporting PbD. We demonstrate how our approach, based on the modeling GDPR
content with original legal concepts, contributes to specification objectives of
capturing legal knowledge, supporting specification transparency, and
traceability. Conclusion: GDPR demands need to be addressed throughout different
levels of abstraction in the engineering lifecycle to achieve PbD. Legal
knowledge specified in the GDPR text should be captured in specifications to
address the demands of different stakeholders and ensure compliance. While our
results confirm the suitability of our approach to address practical needs, we
also revealed specific needs for the future effective operationalization of the
approach.
