Title: Relative Code Comprehensibility Prediction
Authors: Nadeeshan De Silva, Martin Kellogg, Oscar Chaparro
ID: 2510.03474
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.03474

Abstract:
Automatically predicting how difficult it is for humans to understand a code
snippet can assist developers in tasks like deciding when and where to refactor.
Despite many proposed code comprehensibility metrics, studies have shown they
often correlate poorly with actual measurements of human comprehensibility. This
has motivated the use of machine learning models to predict human
comprehensibility directly from code, but these models have also shown limited
accuracy. We argue that model inaccuracy stems from inherent noise in human
comprehensibility data, which confuses models trained to predict it directly. To
address this, we propose training models to predict the relative
comprehensibility of two code snippets - that is, predicting which snippet a
human would find easier to understand without predicting each snippet's
comprehensibility in isolation. This mitigates noise in predicting 'absolute'
comprehensibility measurements, but is still useful for downstream
software-engineering tasks like assessing whether refactoring improves or
hinders comprehensibility. We conducted a study to assess and compare the
effectiveness of absolute and relative code comprehensibility prediction via
machine learning. We used a dataset of 150 Java code snippets and 12.5k human
comprehensibility measurements from prior user studies, comparing the models'
performance with naive baselines (eg 'always predict the majority class'). Our
findings indicate that absolute comprehensibility models improve over the
baselines by at most 33.4% and frequently underperform. In contrast, relative
comprehensibility models are substantially better, with average improvements of
137.8% and 74.7% for snippet-wise and developer-wise prediction, respectively.
These results suggest that relative comprehensibility models learn more
effectively from the data, supporting their practical applicability for
downstream SE tasks.
