Title: Code Refactoring with LLM: A Comprehensive Evaluation With Few-Shot Settings
Authors: Md. Raihan Tapader, Md. Mostafizer Rahman, Ariful Islam Shiplu, Md Faizul Ibne Amin, Yutaka Watanobe
ID: 2511.21788
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.21788

Abstract:
In today's world, the focus of programmers has shifted from writing complex,
error-prone code to prioritizing simple, clear, efficient, and sustainable code
that makes programs easier to understand. Code refactoring plays a critical role
in this transition by improving structural organization and optimizing
performance. However, existing refactoring methods are limited in their ability
to generalize across multiple programming languages and coding styles, as they
often rely on manually crafted transformation rules. The objectives of this
study are to (i) develop an Large Language Models (LLMs)-based framework capable
of performing accurate and efficient code refactoring across multiple languages
(C, C++, C#, Python, Java), (ii) investigate the impact of prompt engineering
(Temperature, Different shot algorithm) and instruction fine-tuning on
refactoring effectiveness, and (iii) evaluate the quality improvements
(Compilability, Correctness, Distance, Similarity, Number of Lines, Token,
Character, Cyclomatic Complexity) in refactored code through empirical metrics
and human assessment. To accomplish these goals, we propose a fine-tuned
prompt-engineering-based model combined with few-shot learning for multilingual
code refactoring. Experimental results indicate that Java achieves the highest
overall correctness up to 99.99% the 10-shot setting, records the highest
average compilability of 94.78% compared to the original source code and
maintains high similarity (Approx. 53-54%) and thus demonstrates a strong
balance between structural modifications and semantic preservation. Python
exhibits the lowest structural distance across all shots (Approx. 277-294) while
achieving moderate similarity ( Approx. 44-48%) that indicates consistent and
minimally disruptive refactoring.
