Title: SmartSecChain-SDN: A Blockchain-Integrated Intelligent Framework for Secure and Efficient Software-Defined Networks
Authors: Azhar Hussain Mozumder, M. John Basha, Chayapathi A. R
ID: 2511.05156
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.05156

Abstract:
With more and more existing networks being transformed to Software-Defined
Networking (SDN), they need to be more secure and demand smarter ways of traffic
control. This work, SmartSecChain-SDN, is a platform that combines machine
learning based intrusion detection, blockchain-based storage of logs, and
application-awareness-based priority in SDN networks. To detect network
intrusions in a real-time, precision and low-false positives setup, the
framework utilizes the application of advanced machine learning algorithms,
namely Random Forest, XGBoost, CatBoost, and CNN-BiLSTM. SmartSecChain-SDN is
based on the Hyperledger Fabric, which is a permissioned blockchain technology,
to provide secure, scalable, and privacy-preserving storage and, thus, guarantee
that the Intrusion Detection System (IDS) records cannot be altered and can be
analyzed comprehensively. The system also has Quality of Service (QoS) rules and
traffic shaping based on applications, which enables prioritization of critical
services, such as VoIP, video conferencing, and business applications, as well
as de-prioritization of non-essential traffic, such as downloads and updates.
Mininet can simulate real-time SDN scenarios because it is used to prototype
whole architectures. It is also compatible with controllers OpenDaylight and
Ryu. It has tested the framework using the InSDN dataset and proved that it can
identify different kinds of cyberattacks and handle bandwidth allocation
efficiently under circumstances of resource constraints. SmartSecChain-SDN
comprehensively addresses SDN system protection, securing and enhancing. The
proposed study offers an innovative, extensible way to improve cybersecurity,
regulatory compliance, and the administration of next-generation programmable
networks.
