Title: Table Comprehension in Building Codes using Vision Language Models and Domain-Specific Fine-Tuning
Authors: Mohammad Aqib, Mohd Hamza, Ying Hei Chui, Qipei Mei
ID: 2511.18306
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.18306

Abstract:
Building codes contain critical information for ensuring safety, regulatory
compliance, and informed decision-making in construction and engineering.
Automated question answering systems over such codes enable quick and accurate
access to specific regulatory clauses, improving efficiency and reducing errors.
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) systems are essential for this task as they
combine the precision of information retrieval with the generative capabilities
of language models. However, tabular data are challenging to extract as they
often involve complex layouts, merged cells, multi-row headers, and embedded
semantic relationships that are not easily captured by traditional natural
language processing techniques and Vision Language Models (VLMs). This paper
explores and compares two methods for extracting information from tabular data
in building codes using several pre-trained VLMs. First, a direct input method
is used, where the image of the page is input directly into the VLMs, which are
then tasked with answering questions based on the image. Second, an indirect
input method is introduced, which involves converting an image of a page
containing tables into the LaTeX code and then answering inquires based on the
LaTeX-based input. The experiments find that the direct input method generally
resulted in higher accuracy than the indirect input method. To further improve
the performance, we fine-tuned each VLM using Low Rank Adaptation (LoRA) on a
domain-specific tabular dataset. The fine-tuned models exhibited substantial
improvements, with Qwen2.5-VL-3B-Instruct achieving relative accuracy gains
exceeding 100%. Our results highlight the potential of parameter-efficient
fine-tuning methods to adapt powerful VLMs for understanding complex structured
data in specialized fields, such as building code interpretation and regulatory
compliance.
