Title: Who's Who? LLM-assisted Software Traceability with Architecture Entity Recognition
Authors: Dominik Fuchß, Haoyu Liu, Sophie Corallo, Tobias Hey, Jan Keim et al.
ID: 2511.02434
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.02434

Abstract:
Identifying architecturally relevant entities in textual artifacts is crucial
for Traceability Link Recovery (TLR) between Software Architecture Documentation
(SAD) and source code. While Software Architecture Models (SAMs) can bridge the
semantic gap between these artifacts, their manual creation is time-consuming.
LLMs offer new capabilities for extracting architectural entities from SAD and
source code to construct SAMs automatically or establish direct trace links.
This paper extends our ICSA 2025 paper [19], which introduced Extracting
Architecture (ExArch) for LLM-based architecture component name extraction. The
extension contributes the novel Architecture Traceability with Entity Matching
via Semantic inference (ArTEMiS) approach, an extended evaluation with
additional LLMs, configurations, a revised benchmark, and a combined evaluation
of both approaches. Specifically, this paper presents the following approaches:
ExArch extracts component names as simple SAMs from SAD and source code to
eliminate the need for manual SAM creation, while ArTEMiS identifies
architectural entities in documentation and matches them with (manually or
automatically generated) SAM entities. Our evaluation compares against
state-of-the-art approaches SWATTR, TransArC and ArDoCode. TransArC achieves
strong performance (F1: 0.87) but requires manually created SAMs; ExArch
achieves comparable results (F1: 0.86) using only SAD and code. ArTEMiS is on
par with the traditional heuristic-based SWATTR (F1: 0.81) and can successfully
replace it when integrated with TransArC. The combination of ArTEMiS and ExArch
outperforms ArDoCode, the best baseline without manual SAMs. Our results
demonstrate that LLMs can effectively identify architectural entities in textual
artifacts, enabling automated SAM generation and TLR, making architecture-code
traceability more practical and accessible.
