Title: Modeling and Optimizing Performance Bottlenecks for Neuromorphic Accelerators
Authors: Jason Yik, Walter Gallego Gomez, Andrew Cheng, Benedetto Leto, Alessandro Pierro et al.
ID: 2511.21549
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.21549

Abstract:
Neuromorphic accelerators offer promising platforms for machine learning (ML)
inference by leveraging event-driven, spatially-expanded architectures that
naturally exploit unstructured sparsity through co-located memory and compute.
However, their unique architectural characteristics create performance dynamics
that differ fundamentally from conventional accelerators. Existing workload
optimization approaches for neuromorphic accelerators rely on aggregate
network-wide sparsity and operation counting, but the extent to which these
metrics actually improve deployed performance remains unknown. This paper
presents the first comprehensive performance bound and bottleneck analysis of
neuromorphic accelerators, revealing the shortcomings of the conventional
metrics and offering an understanding of what facets matter for workload
performance. We present both theoretical analytical modeling and extensive
empirical characterization of three real neuromorphic accelerators: Brainchip
AKD1000, Synsense Speck, and Intel Loihi 2. From these, we establish three
distinct accelerator bottleneck states, memory-bound, compute-bound, and
traffic-bound, and identify which workload configuration features are likely to
exhibit these bottleneck states. We synthesize all of our insights into the
floorline performance model, a visual model that identifies performance bounds
and informs how to optimize a given workload, based on its position on the
model. Finally, we present an optimization methodology that combines
sparsity-aware training with floorline-informed partitioning. Our methodology
achieves substantial performance improvements at iso-accuracy: up to 3.86x
runtime improvement and 3.38x energy reduction compared to prior manually-tuned
configurations.
