Title: Developers' Experience with Generative AI -- First Insights from an Empirical Mixed-Methods Field Study
Authors: Charlotte Brandebusemeyer, Tobias Schimmer, Bert Arnrich
ID: 2512.19926
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.19926

Abstract:
With the rise of AI-powered coding assistants, firms and programmers are
exploring how to optimize their interaction with them. Research has so far
mainly focused on evaluating output quality and productivity gains, leaving
aside the developers' experience during the interaction. In this study, we take
a multimodal, developer-centered approach to gain insights into how professional
developers experience the interaction with Generative AI (GenAI) in their
natural work environment in a firm. The aim of this paper is (1) to demonstrate
a feasible mixed-method study design with controlled and uncontrolled study
periods within a firm setting, (2) to give first insights from complementary
behavioral and subjective experience data on developers' interaction with GitHub
Copilot and (3) to compare the impact of interaction types (no Copilot use,
in-code suggestions, chat prompts or both in-code suggestions and chat prompts)
on efficiency, accuracy and perceived workload whilst working on different task
categories. Results of the controlled sessions in this study indicate that
moderate use of either in-code suggestions or chat prompts improves efficiency
(task duration) and reduces perceived workload compared to not using Copilot,
while excessive or combined use lessens these benefits. Accuracy (task
completion) profits from chat interaction. In general, subjective perception of
workload aligns with objective behavioral data in this study. During the
uncontrolled period of the study, both higher cognitive load and productivity
were perceived when interacting with AI during everyday working tasks. This
study motivates the use of comparable study designs, in e.g. workshop or
hackathon settings, to evaluate GenAI tools holistically and realistically with
a focus on the developers' experience.
