Title: Generating REST API Tests With Descriptive Names
Authors: Philip Garrett, Juan P. Galeotti, Andrea Arcuri, Alexander Poth, Olsi Rrjolli
ID: 2512.01690
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.01690

Abstract:
Automated test generation has become a key technique for ensuring software
quality, particularly in modern API-based architectures. However, automatically
generated test cases are typically assigned non-descriptive names (e.g., test0,
test1), which reduces their readability and hinders their usefulness during
comprehension and maintenance. In this work, we present three novel
deterministic techniques to generate REST API test names. We then compare eight
techniques in total for generating descriptive names for REST API tests
automatically produced by the fuzzer EvoMaster, using 10 test cases generated
for 9 different open-source APIs. The eight techniques include rule-based
heuristics and large language model (LLM)-based approaches. Their effectiveness
was empirically evaluated through two surveys (involving up to 39 people
recruited via LinkedIn). Our results show that a rule-based approach achieves
the highest clarity ratings among deterministic methods, performs on par with
state-of-the-art LLM-based models such as Gemini and GPT-4o, and significantly
outperforms GPT-3.5. To further evaluate the practical impact of our results, an
industrial case study was carried out with practitioners who actively use
EvoMaster at Volkswagen AG. A developer questionnaire was then carried out based
on the use of EvoMaster on four different APIs by four different users, for a
total of 74 evaluated test cases. Feedback from practitioners further confirms
that descriptive names produced by this approach improve test suite readability.
These findings highlight that lightweight, deterministic techniques can serve as
effective alternatives to computationally expensive and security-sensitive
LLM-based approaches for automated system-level test naming, providing a
practical step toward more developer-friendly API test generation.
