Title: FronTalk: Benchmarking Front-End Development as Conversational Code Generation with Multi-Modal Feedback
Authors: Xueqing Wu, Zihan Xue, Da Yin, Shuyan Zhou, Kai-Wei Chang et al.
ID: 2601.04203
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.04203

Abstract:
We present FronTalk, a benchmark for front-end code generation that pioneers the
study of a unique interaction dynamic: conversational code generation with
multi-modal feedback. In front-end development, visual artifacts such as
sketches, mockups and annotated creenshots are essential for conveying design
intent, yet their role in multi-turn code generation remains largely unexplored.
To address this gap, we focus on the front-end development task and curate
FronTalk, a collection of 100 multi-turn dialogues derived from real-world
websites across diverse domains such as news, finance, and art. Each turn
features both a textual instruction and an equivalent visual instruction, each
representing the same user intent. To comprehensively evaluate model
performance, we propose a novel agent-based evaluation framework leveraging a
web agent to simulate users and explore the website, and thus measuring both
functional correctness and user experience. Evaluation of 20 models reveals two
key challenges that are under-explored systematically in the literature: (1) a
significant forgetting issue where models overwrite previously implemented
features, resulting in task failures, and (2) a persistent challenge in
interpreting visual feedback, especially for open-source vision-language models
(VLMs). We propose a strong baseline to tackle the forgetting issue with
AceCoder, a method that critiques the implementation of every past instruction
using an autonomous web agent. This approach significantly reduces forgetting to
nearly zero and improves the performance by up to 9.3% (56.0% to 65.3%).
Overall, we aim to provide a solid foundation for future research in front-end
development and the general interaction dynamics of multi-turn, multi-modal code
generation. Code and data are released at https://github.com/shirley-wu/frontalk
