Title: Improving conversion rate prediction via self-supervised pre-training in
online advertising
Authors: Alex Shtoff, Yohay Kaplan, Ariel Raviv
ID: 2401.16432
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.16432

Abstract:
The task of predicting conversion rates (CVR) lies at the heart of online
advertising systems aiming to optimize bids to meet advertiser performance
requirements. Even with the recent rise of deep neural networks, these
predictions are often made by factorization machines (FM), especially in
commercial settings where inference latency is key. These models are trained
using the logistic regression framework on labeled tabular data formed from past
user activity that is relevant to the task at hand.
  Many advertisers only care about click-attributed conversions. A major
challenge in training models that predict conversions-given-clicks comes from
data sparsity - clicks are rare, conversions attributed to clicks are even
rarer. However, mitigating sparsity by adding conversions that are not click-
attributed to the training set impairs model calibration. Since calibration is
critical to achieving advertiser goals, this is infeasible.
  In this work we use the well-known idea of self-supervised pre-training, and
use an auxiliary auto-encoder model trained on all conversion events, both
click-attributed and not, as a feature extractor to enrich the main CVR
prediction model. Since the main model does not train on non click-attributed
conversions, this does not impair calibration. We adapt the basic self-
supervised pre-training idea to our online advertising setup by using a loss
function designed for tabular data, facilitating continual learning by ensuring
auto-encoder stability, and incorporating a neural network into a large-scale
real-time ad auction that ranks tens of thousands of ads, under strict latency
constraints, and without incurring a major engineering cost. We show
improvements both offline, during training, and in an online A/B test. Following
its success in A/B tests, our solution is now fully deployed to the Yahoo native
advertising system.
