Title: Machine Learning for Shipwreck Segmentation from Side Scan Sonar Imagery:
Dataset and Benchmark
Authors: Advaith V. Sethuraman, Anja Sheppard, Onur Bagoren, Christopher Pinnow,
Jamey Anderson, Timothy C. Havens, Katherine A. Skinner
ID: 2401.14546
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.14546

Abstract:
Open-source benchmark datasets have been a critical component for advancing
machine learning for robot perception in terrestrial applications. Benchmark
datasets enable the widespread development of state-of-the-art machine learning
methods, which require large datasets for training, validation, and thorough
comparison to competing approaches. Underwater environments impose several
operational challenges that hinder efforts to collect large benchmark datasets
for marine robot perception. Furthermore, a low abundance of targets of interest
relative to the size of the search space leads to increased time and cost
required to collect useful datasets for a specific task. As a result, there is
limited availability of labeled benchmark datasets for underwater applications.
We present the AI4Shipwrecks dataset, which consists of 28 distinct shipwrecks
totaling 286 high-resolution labeled side scan sonar images to advance the
state-of-the-art in autonomous sonar image understanding. We leverage the unique
abundance of targets in Thunder Bay National Marine Sanctuary in Lake Huron, MI,
to collect and compile a sonar imagery benchmark dataset through surveys with an
autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV). We consulted with expert marine
archaeologists for the labeling of robotically gathered data. We then leverage
this dataset to perform benchmark experiments for comparison of state-of-the-art
supervised segmentation methods, and we present insights on opportunities and
open challenges for the field. The dataset and benchmarking tools will be
released as an open-source benchmark dataset to spur innovation in machine
learning for Great Lakes and ocean exploration. The dataset and accompanying
software are available at https://umfieldrobotics.github.io/ai4shipwrecks/.
