Title: cDVGAN: One Flexible Model for Multi-class Gravitational Wave Signal and
Glitch Generation
Authors: Tom Dooney, Lyana Curier, Daniel Tan, Melissa Lopez, Chris Van Den
Broeck, Stefano Bromuri
ID: 2401.16356
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.16356

Abstract:
Simulating realistic time-domain observations of gravitational waves (GWs) and
GW detector glitches can help in advancing GW data analysis. Simulated data can
be used in downstream tasks by augmenting datasets for signal searches,
balancing data sets for machine learning, and validating detection schemes. In
this work, we present Conditional Derivative GAN (cDVGAN), a novel conditional
model in the Generative Adversarial Network framework for simulating multiple
classes of time-domain observations that represent gravitational waves (GWs) and
detector glitches. cDVGAN can also generate generalized hybrid samples that span
the variation between classes through interpolation in the conditioned class
vector. cDVGAN introduces an additional player into the typical 2-player
adversarial game of GANs, where an auxiliary discriminator analyzes the first-
order derivative time-series. Our results show that this provides synthetic data
that better captures the features of the original data. cDVGAN conditions on
three classes, two denoised from LIGO blip and tomte glitch events from its 3rd
observing run (O3), and the third representing binary black hole (BBH) mergers.
Our proposed cDVGAN outperforms 4 different baseline GAN models in replicating
the features of the three classes. Specifically, our experiments show that
training convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with our cDVGAN-generated data
improves the detection of samples embedded in detector noise beyond the
synthetic data from other state-of-the-art GAN models. Our best synthetic
dataset yields as much as a 4.2% increase in area-under-the-curve (AUC)
performance compared to synthetic datasets from baseline GANs. Moreover,
training the CNN with hybrid samples from our cDVGAN outperforms CNNs trained
only on the standard classes, when identifying real samples embedded in LIGO
detector background (4% AUC improvement for cDVGAN).
