Title: X-ray AGNs with SRG/eROSITA: Multi-wavelength observations reveal merger
triggering and post-coalescence circumnuclear blowout
Authors: Robert W. Bickley, Sara L. Ellison, Mara Salvato, Samir Salim, David R.
Patton, Andrea Merloni, Shoshannah Byrne-Mamahit, Leonardo Ferreira, Scott
Wilkinson
ID: 2401.17277
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.17277

Abstract:
Major mergers between galaxies are predicted to fuel their central supermassive
black holes (SMBHs), particularly after coalescence. However, determining the
prevalence of active galactic nuclei (AGNs) in mergers remains a challenge,
because AGN diagnostics are sensitive to details of the central structure (e.g.,
nuclear gas clouds, geometry and orientation of a dusty torus) that are partly
decoupled from SMBH accretion. X-rays, expected to be ubiquitous among accreting
systems, are detectable through non-Compton-thick screens of obscuring material,
and thus offer the potential for a more complete assessment of AGNs in mergers.
But, extant statistical X-ray studies of AGNs in mergers have been limited by
either sparse, heterogeneous, or shallow on-sky coverage. We use new X-ray
observations from the first SRG/eROSITA all-sky data release to characterize the
incidence, luminosity, and observability of AGNs in mergers. Combining machine
learning and visual classification, we identify 923 post-mergers in Dark Energy
Camera Legacy Survey (DECaLS) imaging and select 4,565 interacting galaxy pairs
(with separations <120 kpc and mass ratios within 1:10) from the Sloan Digital
Sky Survey. We find that galaxies with X-ray AGNs are 2.0+/-0.24 times as likely
to be identified as post-mergers compared to non-AGN controls, and that post-
mergers are 1.8+/-0.1 times as likely to host an X-ray AGN as non-interacting
controls. A multi-wavelength census of X-ray, optical, and mid-IR-selected AGNs
suggests a picture wherein the underlying AGN fraction increases during pair-
phase interactions, that galaxy pairs within ~20 kpc become heavily obscured,
and that the obscuration often clears post-coalescence.
