Title: Assessing the Benefits and Risks of Quantum Computers
Authors: Travis L. Scholten, Carl J. Williams, Dustin Moody, Michele Mosca,
William Hurley, William J. Zeng, Matthias Troyer, Jay M. Gambetta
ID: 2401.16317
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.16317

Abstract:
Quantum computing is an emerging technology with potentially far-reaching
implications for national prosperity and security. Understanding the timeframes
over which economic benefits and national security risks may manifest themselves
is vital for ensuring the prudent development of this technology. To inform
security experts and policy decision makers on this matter, we review what is
currently known on the potential uses and risks of quantum computers, leveraging
current research literature.
  The maturity of currently-available quantum computers is not yet at a level
such that they can be used in production for large-scale, industrially-relevant
problems, and they are not believed to currently pose security risks. We
identify 2 large-scale trends -- new approximate methods (variational
algorithms, error mitigation, and circuit knitting) and the commercial
exploration of business-relevant quantum applications -- which, together, may
enable useful and practical quantum computing in the near future.
  Crucially, these methods do not appear likely to change the required resources
for cryptanalysis on currently-used cryptosystems. From an analysis we perform
of the current and known algorithms for cryptanalysis, we find they require
circuits of a size exceeding those that can be run by current and near-future
quantum computers (and which will require error correction), though we
acknowledge improvements in quantum algorithms for these problems are taking
place in the literature. In addition, the risk to cybersecurity can be well-
managed by the migration to new, quantum-safe cryptographic protocols, which we
survey and discuss.
  Given the above, we conclude there is a credible expectation that quantum
computers will be capable of performing computations which are economically-
impactful before they will be capable of performing ones which are
cryptographically-relevant.
