Title: Unified neural field theory of brain dynamics underlying oscillations in
Parkinson's disease and generalized epilepsies
Authors: Eli J Müller, Sacha J van Albada, Jong-Won Kim, Peter A Robinson
ID: 2401.13467
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.13467

Abstract:
The mechanisms underlying pathologically synchronized neural oscillations in
Parkinson's disease (PD) and generalized epilepsies are jointly explored via a
neural field model of the corticothalamic-basal ganglia (CTBG) system. The basal
ganglia (BG) are approximated as a single effective population and their roles
in modulating oscillatory corticothalamic (CT) dynamics and vice versa are
analyzed. Besides normal EEG rhythms, enhanced activity around 4 Hz and 20 Hz
exists in the model, consistent with characteristic frequencies in PD. These
rhythms result from resonances in loops between the BG and CT populations,
analogous to those underlying epileptic oscillations in a previous CT model.
Dopamine depletion is argued to weaken the dampening of these resonances in PD,
and network connections explain the significant coherence between BG, thalamic,
and cortical activity around 4-8 Hz and 20 Hz. Parallels between the afferent
and efferent connection sites of the thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN) and BG
predict low dopamine to correspond to a reduced likelihood of tonic-clonic
(grand mal) seizures, agreeing with experimental findings. Further, the model
predicts an increased likelihood of absence (petit mal) seizure resulting from
low dopamine levels matching experimental findings. Suppression of absence
seizure activity is shown when afferent and efferent BG connections to the CT
system are strengthened, consistent with other CTBG modeling studies. The BG are
demonstrated to suppress activity of the CTBG system near tonic-clonic seizure
states, providing insight into the reported efficacy of current treatments in BG
circuits. Sleep states of the TRN are also found to suppress pathological PD
activity matching observations. Overall, the findings demonstrate strong
parallels between coherent oscillations in generalized epilepsies and PD, and
provide insights into possible comorbidities.
