Title: Quantum Circuit Mapping for Universal and Scalable Computing in MZI-based
Integrated Photonics
Authors: Yong Kwon, Alessio Baldazzi, Lorenzo Pavesi, Byung-Soo Choi
ID: 2401.16875
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.16875

Abstract:
Linear optical quantum computing (LOQC) offers a quantum computation paradigm
based on well-established and robust technology and flexible environmental
conditions following DiVincenzo's criteria. Within this framework, integrated
photonics can be utilized to achieve gate-based quantum computing, defining
qubits by path-encoding, quantum gates through the use of Mach-Zehnder
interferometers (MZIs) as fundamental building blocks, and measurements through
single-photon detectors. In particular, universal two-qubit gates can be
achieved by suitable structures of MZIs together with post-selection or
heralding. The most resource-efficient choice is given by the post-selected CZ
gate. However, this implementation is characterized by a design which has a non-
regular structure and cannot be cascaded. This limits the implementation of
large-scale LOQC. Starting from these issues, we suggest an approach to move
toward a universal and scalable LOQC on the integrated photonic platform. First
of all, choosing the post-selected CZ as universal two-qubit gate, we extend the
path-encoded dual-rail qubit to a triplet of waveguides, composed of an
auxiliary waveguide and the pair of waveguides corresponding to the qubit basis
states. Additionally, we introduce a swap photonic network that maps the
regularly-labeled structure of the new path-encoded qubits to the structure
needed for the post-selected CZ. We also discuss the optical swap gate that
allows the connection of non-nearest neighbor path-encoded qubits. In this way,
we can deterministically exchange the locations of the qubits and execute
controlled quantum gates between any path-encoded qubits. Next, by truncating
the auxiliary waveguides after any post-selected CZ, we find that it is possible
to cascade this optical gate when it acts on different pairs that share only one
qubit.
