Title: Tissue Artifact Segmentation and Severity Analysis for Automated
Diagnosis Using Whole Slide Images
Authors: Galib Muhammad Shahriar Himel
ID: 2401.01386
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.01386

Abstract:
Traditionally, pathological analysis and diagnosis are performed by manually
eyeballing glass slide specimens under a microscope by an expert. The whole
slide image is the digital specimen produced from the glass slide. Whole slide
image enabled specimens to be observed on a computer screen and led to
computational pathology where computer vision and artificial intelligence are
utilized for automated analysis and diagnosis. With the current computational
advancement, the entire whole slide image can be analyzed autonomously without
human supervision. However, the analysis could fail or lead to wrong diagnosis
if the whole slide image is affected by tissue artifacts such as tissue fold or
air bubbles depending on the severity. Existing artifact detection methods rely
on experts for severity assessment to eliminate artifact affected regions from
the analysis. This process is time consuming, exhausting and undermines the goal
of automated analysis or removal of artifacts without evaluating their severity,
which could result in the loss of diagnostically important data. Therefore, it
is necessary to detect artifacts and then assess their severity automatically.
In this paper, we propose a system that incorporates severity evaluation with
artifact detection utilizing convolutional neural networks. The proposed system
uses DoubleUNet to segment artifacts and an ensemble network of six fine tuned
convolutional neural network models to determine severity. This method
outperformed current state of the art in accuracy by 9 percent for artifact
segmentation and achieved a strong correlation of 97 percent with the evaluation
of pathologists for severity assessment. The robustness of the system was
demonstrated using our proposed heterogeneous dataset and practical usability
was ensured by integrating it with an automated analysis system.
