Title: AI-enabled Cyber-Physical In-Orbit Factory -- AI approaches based on
digital twin technology for robotic small satellite production
Authors: Florian Leutert, David Bohlig, Florian Kempf, Klaus Schilling,
Maximilian Mühlbauer, Bengisu Ayan, Thomas Hulin, Freek Stulp, Alin Albu-
Schäffer, Vladimir Kutscher, Christian Plesker, Thomas Dasbach, Stephan Damm,
Reiner Anderl, Benjamin Schleich
ID: 2401.17799
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.17799

Abstract:
With the ever increasing number of active satellites in space, the rising demand
for larger formations of small satellites and the commercialization of the space
industry (so-called New Space), the realization of manufacturing processes in
orbit comes closer to reality. Reducing launch costs and risks, allowing for
faster on-demand deployment of individually configured satellites as well as the
prospect for possible on-orbit servicing for satellites makes the idea of
realizing an in-orbit factory promising. In this paper, we present a novel
approach to an in-orbit factory of small satellites covering a digital process
twin, AI-based fault detection, and teleoperated robot-control, which are being
researched as part of the "AI-enabled Cyber-Physical In-Orbit Factory" project.
In addition to the integration of modern automation and Industry 4.0 production
approaches, the question of how artificial intelligence (AI) and learning
approaches can be used to make the production process more robust, fault-
tolerant and autonomous is addressed. This lays the foundation for a later
realisation of satellite production in space in the form of an in-orbit factory.
Central aspect is the development of a robotic AIT (Assembly, Integration and
Testing) system where a small satellite could be assembled by a manipulator
robot from modular subsystems. Approaches developed to improving this production
process with AI include employing neural networks for optical and electrical
fault detection of components. Force sensitive measuring and motion training
helps to deal with uncertainties and tolerances during assembly. An AI-guided
teleoperated control of the robot arm allows for human intervention while a
Digital Process Twin represents process data and provides supervision during the
whole production process. Approaches and results towards automated satellite
production are presented in detail.
