Title: Can AI Be as Creative as Humans?
Authors: Haonan Wang, James Zou, Michael Mozer, Anirudh Goyal, Alex Lamb, Linjun
Zhang, Weijie J Su, Zhun Deng, Michael Qizhe Xie, Hannah Brown, Kenji Kawaguchi
ID: 2401.01623
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.01623

Abstract:
Creativity serves as a cornerstone for societal progress and innovation. With
the rise of advanced generative AI models capable of tasks once reserved for
human creativity, the study of AI's creative potential becomes imperative for
its responsible development and application. In this paper, we prove in theory
that AI can be as creative as humans under the condition that it can properly
fit the data generated by human creators. Therefore, the debate on AI's
creativity is reduced into the question of its ability to fit a sufficient
amount of data. To arrive at this conclusion, this paper first addresses the
complexities in defining creativity by introducing a new concept called Relative
Creativity. Rather than attempting to define creativity universally, we shift
the focus to whether AI can match the creative abilities of a hypothetical
human. The methodological shift leads to a statistically quantifiable assessment
of AI's creativity, term Statistical Creativity. This concept, statistically
comparing the creative abilities of AI with those of specific human groups,
facilitates theoretical exploration of AI's creative potential. Our analysis
reveals that by fitting extensive conditional data without marginalizing out the
generative conditions, AI can emerge as a hypothetical new creator. The creator
possesses the same creative abilities on par with the human creators it was
trained on. Building on theoretical findings, we discuss the application in
prompt-conditioned autoregressive models, providing a practical means for
evaluating creative abilities of generative AI models, such as Large Language
Models (LLMs). Additionally, this study provides an actionable training
guideline, bridging the theoretical quantification of creativity with practical
model training.
