Title: PADTHAI-MM: Principles-based Approach for Designing Trustworthy, Human-
centered AI using MAST Methodology
Authors: Myke C. Cohen, Nayoung Kim, Yang Ba, Anna Pan, Shawaiz Bhatti, Pouria
Salehi, James Sung, Erik Blasch, Michelle V. Mancenido, Erin K. Chiou
ID: 2401.13850
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.13850

Abstract:
Despite an extensive body of literature on trust in technology, designing
trustworthy AI systems for high-stakes decision domains remains a significant
challenge, further compounded by the lack of actionable design and evaluation
tools. The Multisource AI Scorecard Table (MAST) was designed to bridge this gap
by offering a systematic, tradecraft-centered approach to evaluating AI-enabled
decision support systems. Expanding on MAST, we introduce an iterative design
framework called \textit{Principles-based Approach for Designing Trustworthy,
Human-centered AI using MAST Methodology} (PADTHAI-MM). We demonstrate this
framework in our development of the Reporting Assistant for Defense and
Intelligence Tasks (READIT), a research platform that leverages data
visualizations and natural language processing-based text analysis, emulating an
AI-enabled system supporting intelligence reporting work. To empirically assess
the efficacy of MAST on trust in AI, we developed two distinct iterations of
READIT for comparison: a High-MAST version, which incorporates AI contextual
information and explanations, and a Low-MAST version, akin to a ``black box''
system. This iterative design process, guided by stakeholder feedback and
contemporary AI architectures, culminated in a prototype that was evaluated
through its use in an intelligence reporting task. We further discuss the
potential benefits of employing the MAST-inspired design framework to address
context-specific needs. We also explore the relationship between stakeholder
evaluators' MAST ratings and three categories of information known to impact
trust: \textit{process}, \textit{purpose}, and \textit{performance}. Overall,
our study supports the practical benefits and theoretical validity for PADTHAI-
MM as a viable method for designing trustable, context-specific AI systems.
