Title: Non-utopian optical properties computed of a tomographically
reconstructed real photonic nanostructure
Authors: Lars J. Corbijn van Willenswaard, Stef Smeets, Nicolas Renaud, Matthias
Schlottbom, Jaap J. W. van der Vegt, Willem L. Vos
ID: 2402.09395
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.09395

Abstract:
State-of-the-art computational methods combined with common idealized structural
models provide an incomplete understanding of experiments on real
nanostructures, since manufacturing introduces unavoidable deviations from the
design. We propose to close this knowledge gap by using the real structure of a
manufactured crystal as input in computations to obtain a realistic comparison
with observations on the same nanostructure. We demonstrate this approach on the
structure of a real silicon inverse woodpile photonic bandgap crystal, obtained
by previous synchrotron X-ray imaging. A 2D part of the dataset is selected and
processed into a computational mesh suitable for a Discontinuous Galerkin Finite
Element Method (DGFEM) to compute optical transmission spectra that are compared
to those of a utopian crystal, i.e., a hypothetical model crystal with the same
filling fraction where all pores are identical and circular. The nanopore shapes
in the real crystal differ in a complex way from utopian pores, leading to a
complex transmission spectrum with significant frequency speckle in and beyond
the gap. The utopian model provides only a limited understanding of the
spectrum: while it accurately predicts low frequency finite-size fringes and the
lower band edge, the upper band edge is off, it completely misses the presence
of speckle, the domination of speckle above the gap, and possible Anderson
localized states in the gap. Moreover, unlike experiments where only external
probes are available, numerical methods allow to study all fields everywhere.
While the pore shapes hardly affect the fields at low frequency, major
differences occur at high frequency such as localized fields deep inside the
real crystal. In summary, using only external measurements and utopian models
may give an erroneous picture of the fields and the LDOS inside a real crystal,
which is remedied by our new approach.
