Title: Mathematical Opportunities in Digital Twins (MATH-DT)
Authors: Harbir Antil
ID: 2402.10326
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.10326

Abstract:
The report describes the discussions from the Workshop on Mathematical
Opportunities in Digital Twins (MATH-DT) from December 11-13, 2023, George Mason
University.
  It illustrates that foundational Mathematical advances are required for
Digital Twins (DTs) that are different from traditional approaches. A
traditional model, in biology, physics, engineering or medicine, starts with a
generic physical law (e.g., equations) and is often a simplification of reality.
A DT starts with a specific ecosystem, object or person (e.g., personalized
care) representing reality, requiring multi -scale, -physics modeling and
coupling. Thus, these processes begin at opposite ends of the simulation and
modeling pipeline, requiring different reliability criteria and uncertainty
assessments. Additionally, unlike existing approaches, a DT assists humans to
make decisions for the physical system, which (via sensors) in turn feeds data
into the DT, and operates for the life of the physical system.
  While some of the foundational mathematical research can be done without a
specific application context, one must also keep specific applications in mind
for DTs. E.g., modeling a bridge or a biological system (a patient), or a socio-
technical system (a city) is very different. The models range from differential
equations (deterministic/uncertain) in engineering, to stochastic in biology,
including agent-based. These are multi-scale hybrid models or large scale
(multi-objective) optimization problems under uncertainty. There are no
universal models or approaches. For e.g., Kalman filters for forecasting might
work in engineering, but can fail in biomedical domain. Ad hoc studies, with
limited systematic work, have shown that AI/ML methods can fail for simple
engineering systems and can work well for biomedical problems.
  A list of `Mathematical Opportunities and Challenges' concludes the report.
