Title: A non-intrusive machine learning framework for debiasing long-time coarse
resolution climate simulations and quantifying rare events statistics
Authors: Benedikt Barthel Sorensen, Alexis Charalampopoulos, Shixuan Zhang,
Bryce Harrop, Ruby Leung, Themistoklis Sapsis
ID: 2402.18484
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.18484

Abstract:
Due to the rapidly changing climate, the frequency and severity of extreme
weather is expected to increase over the coming decades. As fully-resolved
climate simulations remain computationally intractable, policy makers must rely
on coarse-models to quantify risk for extremes. However, coarse models suffer
from inherent bias due to the ignored "sub-grid" scales. We propose a framework
to non-intrusively debias coarse-resolution climate predictions using neural-
network (NN) correction operators. Previous efforts have attempted to train such
operators using loss functions that match statistics. However, this approach
falls short with events that have longer return period than that of the training
data, since the reference statistics have not converged. Here, the scope is to
formulate a learning method that allows for correction of dynamics and
quantification of extreme events with longer return period than the training
data. The key obstacle is the chaotic nature of the underlying dynamics. To
overcome this challenge, we introduce a dynamical systems approach where the
correction operator is trained using reference data and a coarse model
simulation nudged towards that reference. The method is demonstrated on
debiasing an under-resolved quasi-geostrophic model and the Energy Exascale
Earth System Model (E3SM). For the former, our method enables the quantification
of events that have return period two orders longer than the training data. For
the latter, when trained on 8 years of ERA5 data, our approach is able to
correct the coarse E3SM output to closely reflect the 36-year ERA5 statistics
for all prognostic variables and significantly reduce their spatial biases.
