Title: TDE-3: An improved prior for optical flow computation in spiking neural
networks
Authors: Matthew Yedutenko, Federico Paredes-Valles, Lyes Khacef, Guido C. H. E.
De Croon
ID: 2402.11662
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.11662

Abstract:
Motion detection is a primary task required for robotic systems to perceive and
navigate in their environment. Proposed in the literature bioinspired
neuromorphic Time-Difference Encoder (TDE-2) combines event-based sensors and
processors with spiking neural networks to provide real-time and energy-
efficient motion detection through extracting temporal correlations between two
points in space. However, on the algorithmic level, this design leads to loss of
direction-selectivity of individual TDEs in textured environments. Here we
propose an augmented 3-point TDE (TDE-3) with additional inhibitory input that
makes TDE-3 direction-selectivity robust in textured environments. We developed
a procedure to train the new TDE-3 using backpropagation through time and
surrogate gradients to linearly map input velocities into an output spike count
or an Inter-Spike Interval (ISI). Our work is the first instance of training a
spiking neuron to have a specific ISI. Using synthetic data we compared training
and inference with spike count and ISI with respect to changes in stimuli
dynamic range, spatial frequency, and level of noise. ISI turns out to be more
robust towards variation in spatial frequency, whereas the spike count is a more
reliable training signal in the presence of noise. We performed the first in-
depth quantitative investigation of optical flow coding with TDE and compared
TDE-2 vs TDE-3 in terms of energy-efficiency and coding precision. Results show
that on the network level both detectors show similar precision (20 degree
angular error, 88% correlation with ground truth). Yet, due to the more robust
direction-selectivity of individual TDEs, TDE-3 based network spike less and
hence is more energy-efficient. Reported precision is on par with model-based
methods but the spike-based processing of the TDEs provides allows more energy-
efficient inference with neuromorphic hardware.
