Title: The effect of lightning on the atmospheric chemistry of exoplanets and
potential biosignatures
Authors: Patrick Barth, Eva E. Stüeken, Christiane Helling, Edward W.
Schwieterman, Jon Telling
ID: 2402.13682
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.13682

Abstract:
Lightning has been suggested to play a role in triggering the occurrence of bio-
ready chemical species. Future missions (PLATO, ARIEL, HWO, LIFE) and ground-
based ELTs will investigate the atmospheres of potentially habitable exoplanets.
We aim to study the effect of lightning on the atmospheric chemistry, how it
affects false-positive and false-negative biosignatures, and if its effect would
be observable on an exo-Earth and on TRAPPIST-1 planets. We use a combination of
laboratory experiments, photochemical and radiative transfer modelling. With
spark discharge experiments in N2-CO2-H2 gas mixtures, representing a range of
possible rocky-planet atmospheres, we investigate the production of potential
lightning signatures (CO, NO), possible biosignature gases (N2O, NH3, CH4), and
important prebiotic precursors (HCN, Urea). Photochemical simulations are
conducted for oxygen-rich and anoxic atmospheres for rocky planets in the
habitable zones of the Sun and TRAPPIST-1 for a range of lightning flash rates.
Synthetic spectra are calculated using SMART to study the atmosphere's
reflectance, emission, and transmission spectra. Lightning enhances the spectral
features of NO, NO2, and, in some cases, CO; CH4 and C2H6 may be enhanced
indirectly. Lightning at a flash rate slightly higher than on modern Earth can
mask the ozone features of an oxygen-rich, biotic atmosphere, making it harder
to detect the biosphere. Lightning flash rates at least ten times higher than on
modern Earth can mask the presence of ozone in the anoxic, abiotic atmosphere of
a planet orbiting a late M dwarf, reducing the potential for a false-positive
life-detection. The threshold lightning rates to eliminate oxygen and ozone
false positive biosignatures on planets orbiting ultra-cool dwarfs is up to ten
times higher than the modern flash rate, suggesting that lightning cannot always
prevent these false-positive scenarios.
