Title: Optimizing Delegation in Collaborative Human-AI Hybrid Teams
Authors: Andrew Fuchs, Andrea Passarella, Marco Conti
ID: 2402.05605
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.05605

Abstract:
When humans and autonomous systems operate together as what we refer to as a
hybrid team, we of course wish to ensure the team operates successfully and
effectively. We refer to team members as agents. In our proposed framework, we
address the case of hybrid teams in which, at any time, only one team member
(the control agent) is authorized to act as control for the team. To determine
the best selection of a control agent, we propose the addition of an AI manager
(via Reinforcement Learning) which learns as an outside observer of the team.
The manager learns a model of behavior linking observations of agent performance
and the environment/world the team is operating in, and from these observations
makes the most desirable selection of a control agent. We restrict the manager
task by introducing a set of constraints. The manager constraints indicate
acceptable team operation, so a violation occurs if the team enters a condition
which is unacceptable and requires manager intervention. To ensure minimal added
complexity or potential inefficiency for the team, the manager should attempt to
minimize the number of times the team reaches a constraint violation and
requires subsequent manager intervention. Therefore our manager is optimizing
its selection of authorized agents to boost overall team performance while
minimizing the frequency of manager intervention. We demonstrate our manager
performance in a simulated driving scenario representing the case of a hybrid
team of agents composed of a human driver and autonomous driving system. We
perform experiments for our driving scenario with interfering vehicles,
indicating the need for collision avoidance and proper speed control. Our
results indicate a positive impact of our manager, with some cases resulting in
increased team performance up to ~187% that of the best solo agent performance.
