Title: Calibrating gravitational-wave search algorithms with conformal
prediction
Authors: Gregory Ashton, Nicolo Colombo, Ian Harry, Surabhi Sachdev
ID: 2402.19313
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.19313

Abstract:
In astronomy, we frequently face the decision problem: does this data contain a
signal? Typically, a statistical approach is used, which requires a threshold.
The choice of threshold presents a common challenge in settings where signals
and noise must be delineated, but their distributions overlap. Gravitational-
wave astronomy, which has gone from the first discovery to catalogues of
hundreds of events in less than a decade, presents a fascinating case study. For
signals from colliding compact objects, the field has evolved from a frequentist
to a Bayesian methodology. However, the issue of choosing a threshold and
validating noise contamination in a catalogue persists. Confusion and debate
often arise due to the misapplication of statistical concepts, the complicated
nature of the detection statistics, and the inclusion of astrophysical
background models. We introduce Conformal Prediction (CP), a framework developed
in Machine Learning to provide distribution-free uncertainty quantification to
point predictors. We show that CP can be viewed as an extension of the
traditional statistical frameworks whereby thresholds are calibrated such that
the uncertainty intervals are statistically rigorous and the error rate can be
validated. Moreover, we discuss how CP offers a framework to optimally build a
meta-pipeline combining the outputs from multiple independent searches. We
introduce CP with a toy cosmic-ray detector, which captures the salient features
of most astrophysical search problems and allows us to demonstrate the features
of CP in a simple context. We then apply the approach to a recent gravitational-
wave Mock Data Challenge using multiple search algorithms for compact binary
coalescence signals in interferometric gravitational-wave data. Finally, we
conclude with a discussion on the future potential of the method for
gravitational-wave astronomy.
