Title: AI Art Neural Constellation: Revealing the Collective and Contrastive
State of AI-Generated and Human Art
Authors: Faizan Farooq Khan, Diana Kim, Divyansh Jha, Youssef Mohamed, Hanna H
Chang, Ahmed Elgammal, Luba Elliott, Mohamed Elhoseiny
ID: 2402.02453
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.02453

Abstract:
Discovering the creative potentials of a random signal to various artistic
expressions in aesthetic and conceptual richness is a ground for the recent
success of generative machine learning as a way of art creation. To understand
the new artistic medium better, we conduct a comprehensive analysis to position
AI-generated art within the context of human art heritage. Our comparative
analysis is based on an extensive dataset, dubbed ``ArtConstellation,''
consisting of annotations about art principles, likability, and emotions for
6,000 WikiArt and 3,200 AI-generated artworks. After training various state-of-
the-art generative models, art samples are produced and compared with WikiArt
data on the last hidden layer of a deep-CNN trained for style classification. We
actively examined the various art principles to interpret the neural
representations and used them to drive the comparative knowledge about human and
AI-generated art. A key finding in the semantic analysis is that AI-generated
artworks are visually related to the principle concepts for modern period art
made in 1800-2000. In addition, through Out-Of-Distribution (OOD) and In-
Distribution (ID) detection in CLIP space, we find that AI-generated artworks
are ID to human art when they depict landscapes and geometric abstract figures,
while detected as OOD when the machine art consists of deformed and twisted
figures. We observe that machine-generated art is uniquely characterized by
incomplete and reduced figuration. Lastly, we conducted a human survey about
emotional experience. Color composition and familiar subjects are the key
factors of likability and emotions in art appreciation. We propose our whole
methodologies and collected dataset as our analytical framework to contrast
human and AI-generated art, which we refer to as ``ArtNeuralConstellation''.
Code is available at: https://github.com/faixan-khan/ArtNeuralConstellation
