Title: The Reasoning Under Uncertainty Trap: A Structural AI Risk
Authors: Toby D. Pilditch
ID: 2402.01743
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.01743

Abstract:
This report examines a novel risk associated with current (and projected) AI
tools. Making effective decisions about future actions requires us to reason
under uncertainty (RUU), and doing so is essential to many critical real world
problems. Overfaced by this challenge, there is growing demand for AI tools like
LLMs to assist decision-makers. Having evidenced this demand and the incentives
behind it, we expose a growing risk: we 1) do not currently sufficiently
understand LLM capabilities in this regard, and 2) have no guarantees of
performance given fundamental computational explosiveness and deep uncertainty
constraints on accuracy. This report provides an exposition of what makes RUU so
challenging for both humans and machines, and relates these difficulties to
prospective AI timelines and capabilities. Having established this current
potential misuse risk, we go on to expose how this seemingly additive risk (more
misuse additively contributed to potential harm) in fact has multiplicative
properties. Specifically, we detail how this misuse risk connects to a wider
network of underlying structural risks (e.g., shifting incentives, limited
transparency, and feedback loops) to produce non-linear harms. We go on to
provide a solutions roadmap that targets multiple leverage points in the
structure of the problem. This includes recommendations for all involved actors
(prospective users, developers, and policy-makers) and enfolds insights from
areas including Decision-making Under Deep Uncertainty and complex systems
theory. We argue this report serves not only to raise awareness (and
subsequently mitigate/correct) of a current, novel AI risk, but also awareness
of the underlying class of structural risks by illustrating how their
interconnected nature poses twin-dangers of camouflaging their presence, whilst
amplifying their potential effects.
