Title: Exploring patient trust in clinical advice from AI-driven LLMs like
ChatGPT for self-diagnosis
Authors: Delong Du, Richard Paluch, Gunnar Stevens, Claudia Müller
ID: 2402.07920
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.07920

Abstract:
Trustworthy clinical advice is crucial but burdensome when seeking health
support from professionals. Inaccessibility and financial burdens present
obstacles to obtaining professional clinical advice, even when healthcare is
available. Consequently, individuals often resort to self-diagnosis, utilizing
medical materials to validate the health conditions of their families and
friends. However, the convenient method of self-diagnosis requires a commitment
to learning and is often not effective, presenting risks when individuals seek
self-care approaches or treatment strategies without professional guidance.
Artificial Intelligence (AI), supported by Large Language Models (LLM), may
become a powerful yet risky self-diagnosis tool for clinical advice due to the
hallucination of LLM, where it produces inaccurate yet deceiving information.
Thus, can we trust the clinical advice from AI-driven LLMs like ChatGPT like
ChatGPT4 for self-diagnosis? We examined this issue through a think-aloud
observation: a patient uses GPT4 for self-diagnosis and clinical advice while a
doctor assesses ChatGPT responses with their own expertise. After that, we
conducted a semi-structured interview with the patient to understand their trust
in AI-driven LLMs for clinical advice. we have concluded that the confounding
factors influencing a patient's trust revolve around their competency-
evaluation. Essentially, trust is equated with efficacy, which is determined by
whether decisions made based on the AI agent's clinical advice and suggestion
will effectively achieve the patient health goals. Patients tend to trust
doctors more than AI agents due to this strategy, believing that educated,
authorized doctors can provide effective medical guidance. This competency-based
trust also explains why patients often perceive more experienced doctors as more
trustworthy compared to less experienced ones.
