Title: Interferometry of Atomic Matter Waves in the Cold Atom Lab onboard the
International Space Station
Authors: Jason R. Williams, Charles A. Sackett, Holger Ahlers, David C. Aveline,
Patrick Boegel, Sofia Botsi, Eric Charron, Ethan R. Elliott, Naceur Gaaloul,
Enno Giese, Waldemar Herr, James R. Kellogg, James M. Kohel, Norman E. Lay,
Matthias Meister, Gabriel Müller, Holger Müller, Kamal Oudrhiri, Leah Phillips,
Annie Pichery, Ernst M. Rasel, Albert Roura, Matteo Sbroscia, Wolfgang P.
Schleich, Christian Schneider, Christian Schubert, Bejoy Sen, Robert J.
Thompson, Nicholas P. Bigelow
ID: 2402.14685
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.14685

Abstract:
Ultracold atomic gases hold unique promise for space science by capitalizing on
quantum advantages and extended freefall, afforded in a microgravity
environment, to enable next-generation precision sensors. Atom interferometers
are a class of quantum sensors which can use freely falling gases of atoms
cooled to sub-photon-recoil temperatures to provide unprecedented sensitivities
to accelerations, rotations, and gravitational forces, and are currently being
developed for space-based applications in gravitational, earth, and planetary
sciences, as well as to search for subtle forces that could signify physics
beyond General Relativity and the Standard Model. NASA's Cold Atom Lab (CAL)
operates onboard the International Space Station as a multi-user facility for
studies of ultracold atoms and to mature quantum technologies, including atom
interferometry, in persistent microgravity. In this paper, we report on path-
finding experiments utilizing ultracold $^{87}$Rb atoms in the CAL atom
interferometer, which was enabled by an on-orbit upgrade of the CAL science
module: A three-pulse Mach-Zehnder interferometer was studied to understand
limitations from the influence of ISS vibrations. Additionally, Ramsey shear-
wave interferometry was used to manifest interference patterns in a single run
that were observable for over 150 ms free-expansion time. Finally, the CAL atom
interferometer was used to remotely measure the photon recoil from the atom
interferometer laser as a demonstration of the first quantum sensor using
matter-wave interferometry in space.
