Title: Neural Attributed Community Search at Billion Scale
Authors: Jianwei Wang, Kai Wang, Xuemin Lin, Wenjie Zhang, Ying Zhang
ID: 2403.18874
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.18874

Abstract:
Community search has been extensively studied in the past decades. In recent
years, there is a growing interest in attributed community search that aims to
identify a community based on both the query nodes and query attributes. A set
of techniques have been investigated. Though the recent methods based on
advanced learning models such as graph neural networks (GNNs) can achieve state-
of-the-art performance in terms of accuracy, we notice that 1) they suffer from
severe efficiency issues; 2) they directly model community search as a node
classification problem and thus cannot make good use of interdependence among
different entities in the graph. Motivated by these, in this paper, we propose a
new neurAL attrIbuted Community sEarch model for large-scale graphs, termed
ALICE. ALICE first extracts a candidate subgraph to reduce the search scope and
subsequently predicts the community by the Consistency-aware Net , termed
ConNet. Specifically, in the extraction phase, we introduce the density sketch
modularity that uses a unified form to combine the strengths of two existing
powerful modularities, i.e., classical modularity and density modularity. Based
on the new modularity metric, we first adaptively obtain the candidate subgraph,
formed by the k-hop neighbors of the query nodes, with the maximum modularity.
Then, we construct a node-attribute bipartite graph to take attributes into
consideration. After that, ConNet adopts a cross-attention encoder to encode the
interaction between the query and the graph. The training of the model is guided
by the structure-attribute consistency and the local consistency to achieve
better performance. Extensive experiments over 11 real-world datasets including
one billion-scale graph demonstrate the superiority of ALICE in terms of
accuracy, efficiency, and scalability.
