Title: Probing the quantum nature of gravity using a Bose-Einstein condensate
Authors: Soham Sen, Sunandan Gangopadhyay
ID: 2403.18460
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.18460

Abstract:
The effect of noise induced by gravitons has been investigated using a Bose-
Einstein condensate. The gravitational wave perturbation is then considerd as a
sum of discrete Fourier modes in the momentum space. Coming to an operatorial
representation and quantizing the phase space variables via appropriately
introduced canonincal commutation relations between the canonically conjugate
variables corresponding to the graviton and bosonic part of the total system,
one obtains a proper quantum gravity setup. Then we obtain the Bogoliubov
coefficients from the solution of the time-dependent part of the pseudo-
Goldstone boson and construct the covariance metric for the bosons initially
being in a squeezed state. Using the stochastic average of the Fisher
information, we obtain a lower bound on the amplitude parameter of the
gravitational wave. As the entire calculation is done at zero temperature, the
bosonic system, by construction, will behave as a Bose-Einstein condensate. For
a Bose-Einstein condensate with a single mode, we observe that the lower bound
of the expectation value of the square of the uncertainty in the amplitude
measurement does not become infinite when the total observational term
approaches zero. In order to sum over all possible momentum modes, we next
consider a noise term with a suitable Gaussian weight factor which decays over
time. We then obtain the lower bound on the final expectation value of the
square of the variance in the amplitude parameter. Because of the noise induced
by the graviton, there is a minimum value of the measurement time below which it
is impossible to detect any gravitational wave using a Bose-Einstein condensate.
Finally, we consider interaction between the phonon modes of the Bose-Einstein
condensate which results in the decoherence. We observe that the decoherence
effect becomes significant for gravitons with minimal squeezing.
