Title: Accelerating Scientific Discovery with Generative Knowledge Extraction,
Graph-Based Representation, and Multimodal Intelligent Graph Reasoning
Authors: Markus J. Buehler
ID: 2403.11996
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.11996

Abstract:
Leveraging generative Artificial Intelligence (AI), we have transformed a
dataset comprising 1,000 scientific papers into an ontological knowledge graph.
Through an in-depth structural analysis, we have calculated node degrees,
identified communities and connectivities, and evaluated clustering coefficients
and betweenness centrality of pivotal nodes, uncovering fascinating knowledge
architectures. The graph has an inherently scale-free nature, is highly
connected, and can be used for graph reasoning by taking advantage of transitive
and isomorphic properties that reveal unprecedented interdisciplinary
relationships that can be used to answer queries, identify gaps in knowledge,
propose never-before-seen material designs, and predict material behaviors. We
compute deep node embeddings for combinatorial node similarity ranking for use
in a path sampling strategy links dissimilar concepts that have previously not
been related. One comparison revealed structural parallels between biological
materials and Beethoven's 9th Symphony, highlighting shared patterns of
complexity through isomorphic mapping. In another example, the algorithm
proposed a hierarchical mycelium-based composite based on integrating path
sampling with principles extracted from Kandinsky's 'Composition VII' painting.
The resulting material integrates an innovative set of concepts that include a
balance of chaos/order, adjustable porosity, mechanical strength, and complex
patterned chemical functionalization. We uncover other isomorphisms across
science, technology and art, revealing a nuanced ontology of immanence that
reveal a context-dependent heterarchical interplay of constituents. Graph-based
generative AI achieves a far higher degree of novelty, explorative capacity, and
technical detail, than conventional approaches and establishes a widely useful
framework for innovation by revealing hidden connections.
