Title: Gaussian process surrogate models for the properties of micro-tearing
modes in spherical tokamaks
Authors: William Hornsby, Ander Gray, James Buchanan, Daniel Kenndy, Bhavin
Patel, Francis Casson, Colin Roach, Mikkel Lykkegaard, Huy Nguyen, Nikolaos
Papadimas, Ben Fourcin, Jordan Hart
ID: 2403.13006
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.13006

Abstract:
Spherical tokamaks (STs) have many desirable features that make them a suitable
choice for fusion power plants. To understand their confinement properties,
accurate calculation of turbulent micro-instabilities is necessary for tokamak
design. Presented is a novel surrogate model for Micro-tearing modes (MTMs), the
micro-instability thought to be dominant in high beta STs. Direct numerical
calculation of micro-instabilities is computationally expensive and is a
significant bottleneck in integrated plasma modelling. The considerable number
of geometric and thermodynamic parameters, the interactions that influence these
coefficients and the resolutions needed to accurately resolve these modes, makes
direct numerical simulation for parameter space exploration computationally
extremely challenging. However, this and the dearth of accurate reduced physics
models for MTMs makes it suitable for surrogate modelling using Gaussian Process
Regression, a modern machine learning technique. This paper outlines the further
development of a data-driven reduced-order model across a spherical tokamak
reactor-relevant parameter space utilising Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) and
classification; techniques from machine learning. To build the original simple
GP model these two components were used in an active learning loop to maximise
the efficiency of data acquisition thus minimising computational cost. The
`simple' GP was seen to show a plateau of fidelity with more data and to be
under-confident, particular in areas of parameter space close to marginal
stability. It is postulated that the presence of multiple sub-types of MTM could
be the root cause, with the underlying function being less smooth than expected.
An expansion of the model using clustering algorithms to find optimal sub models
using a mixture of experts approach is shown to greatly improve the variances in
the outputs of the GP model.
