Title: Towards Full Automation of Geometry Extraction for Biomechanical Analysis
of Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm; Neural Network-Based versus Classical
Methodologies
Authors: Farah Alkhatib, Mostafa Jamshidian, Donatien Le Liepvre, Florian
Bernard, Ludovic Minvielle, Antoine Fondanèche, Elke R. Gizewski, Eva Gassner,
Alexander Loizides, Maximilian Lutz, Florian Enzmann, Hozan Mufty, Inge
Fourneau, Adam Wittek, Karol Miller
ID: 2403.07238
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.07238

Abstract:
Background: For the clinical adoption of stress-based rupture risk estimation in
abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAAs), a fully automated pipeline, from clinical
imaging to biomechanical stress computation, is essential. To this end, we
investigated the impact of AI-based image segmentation methods on stress
computation results in the walls of AAAs. We compared wall stress distributions
and magnitudes calculated from geometry models obtained from classical semi-
automated segmentation versus automated neural network-based segmentation.
Method: 16 different AAA contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) images were
semi-automatically segmented by an analyst, taking between 15 and 40 minutes of
human effort per patient, depending on image quality. The same images were
automatically segmented using PRAEVAorta2 commercial software by NUREA
(https://www.nurea-soft.com/), developed based on artificial intelligence (AI)
algorithms, and automatically post-processed with an in-house MATLAB code,
requiring only 1-2 minutes of computer time per patient. Aneurysm wall stress
calculations were automatically performed using the BioPARR software
(https://bioparr.mech.uwa.edu.au/). Results: Compared to the classical semi-
automated segmentation, the automatic neural network-based segmentation leads to
equivalent stress distributions, and slightly higher peak and 99th percentile
maximum principal stress values. However, our statistical analysis indicated
that the differences in AAA wall stress obtained using the two segmentation
methods are not statistically significant and fall well within the typical range
of inter-analyst and intra-analyst variability. Conclusions: Our findings are a
steppingstone toward a fully automated pipeline for biomechanical analysis of
AAAs, starting with CT scans and concluding with wall stress assessment.
