Title: Towards Reverse-Engineering the Brain: Brain-Derived Neuromorphic
Computing Approach with Photonic, Electronic, and Ionic Dynamicity in 3D
integrated circuits
Authors: S. J. Ben Yoo, Luis El-Srouji, Suman Datta, Shimeng Yu, Jean Anne
Incorvia, Alberto Salleo, Volker Sorger, Juejun Hu, Lionel C Kimerling,
Kristofer Bouchard, Joy Geng, Rishidev Chaudhuri, Charan Ranganath, Randall
O'Reilly
ID: 2403.19724
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.19724

Abstract:
The human brain has immense learning capabilities at extreme energy efficiencies
and scale that no artificial system has been able to match. For decades, reverse
engineering the brain has been one of the top priorities of science and
technology research. Despite numerous efforts, conventional electronics-based
methods have failed to match the scalability, energy efficiency, and self-
supervised learning capabilities of the human brain. On the other hand, very
recent progress in the development of new generations of photonic and electronic
memristive materials, device technologies, and 3D electronic-photonic integrated
circuits (3D EPIC ) promise to realize new brain-derived neuromorphic systems
with comparable connectivity, density, energy-efficiency, and scalability. When
combined with bio-realistic learning algorithms and architectures, it may be
possible to realize an 'artificial brain' prototype with general self-learning
capabilities. This paper argues the possibility of reverse-engineering the brain
through architecting a prototype of a brain-derived neuromorphic computing
system consisting of artificial electronic, ionic, photonic materials, devices,
and circuits with dynamicity resembling the bio-plausible molecular,
neuro/synaptic, neuro-circuit, and multi-structural hierarchical macro-circuits
of the brain based on well-tested computational models. We further argue the
importance of bio-plausible local learning algorithms applicable to the
neuromorphic computing system that capture the flexible and adaptive
unsupervised and self-supervised learning mechanisms central to human
intelligence. Most importantly, we emphasize that the unique capabilities in
brain-derived neuromorphic computing prototype systems will enable us to
understand links between specific neuronal and network-level properties with
system-level functioning and behavior.
