Title: 'SSL?! What on earth is that?': Towards Designing Age-Inclusive Secure
Smartphone Browsing
Authors: Pavithren V. S. Pakianathan, L. Siddharth, Sujithra Raviselvam, Kristin
L. Wood, Hyowon Lee, Pin Sym Foong, Jianying Zhou, Simon Tangi Perrault
ID: 2403.02145
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.02145

Abstract:
Owing to the increase in 'certified' phishing websites, there is a steady
increase in the number of phishing cases and general susceptibility to phishing.
Trust mechanisms (e.g., HTTPS Lock Indicators, SSL Certificates) that help
differentiate genuine and phishing websites should therefore be evaluated for
their effectiveness in preventing vulnerable users from accessing phishing
websites. In this article, we present a study involving 18 adults (male-6;
female-12) and 12 older adults (male-4; female-8) to understand the usability of
current trust mechanisms and preferred modalities in a conceptualized mechanism.
In the first part of the study, using Chrome browser on Android, we asked the
participants to browse a banking website and a government website for digital
particulars. We asked them to identify which one of the two was a phishing
website, rate the usability of both websites and provide qualitative feedback on
the trust mechanisms. In the second part, we conceptualized an alternative trust
mechanism, which allows seeking social, community and AI-based support to make
website trust-related decisions. Herein, we asked the participants as to which
modality (social, community or AI) they prefer to seek support from and why it
is preferred. Using the current trust mechanisms, none of the participants were
able to identify the phishing website. As the participants rated the current
mechanisms poorly in terms of usability, they expressed various difficulties
that largely did not differ between adults and older adults. In the
conceptualized mechanism, we observed a notable difference in the preferred
modalities, in that, older adults primarily preferred social support. In
addition to these overall findings, specific observations suggest that future
trust mechanisms should not only consider age-specific needs but also
incorporate substantial improvement in terms of usability.
