Title: Towards Prebiotic Chemistry on Titan: Impact experiments on organic haze
particles
Authors: Ben K. D. Pearce, Sarah M. Hörst, Christopher J. Cline, Mark J.
Cintala, Chao He, Joshua A. Sebree, Shannon M. MacKenzie, R. Terik Daly,
Alexandra J. Pontefract, Cara Pesciotta
ID: 2403.00029
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.00029

Abstract:
Impacts are critical to producing the aqueous environments necessary to
stimulate prebiotic chemistry on Titan's surface. Furthermore, organic hazes
resting on the surface are a likely feedstock of biomolecules. In this work, we
conduct impact experiments on laboratory-produced organic haze particles and
haze/sand mixtures and analyze these samples for life's building blocks. Samples
of unshocked haze and sand particles are also analyzed to determine the change
in biomolecule concentrations and distributions from shocking. Across all
samples, we detect seven nucleobases, nine proteinogenic amino acids, and five
other biomolecules (e.g., urea) using a blank subtraction procedure to eliminate
signals due to contamination. We find that shock pressures of 13 GPa variably
degrade nucleobases, amino acids, and a few other organics in haze particles and
haze/sand mixtures; however, certain individual biomolecules become enriched or
are even produced from these events. Xanthine, threonine, and aspartic acid are
enriched or produced in impact experiments containing sand, suggesting these
minerals may catalyze the production of these biomolecules. On the other hand,
thymine and isoleucine/norleucine are enriched or produced in haze samples
containing no sand, suggesting catalytic grains are not necessary for all impact
shock syntheses. Uracil, glycine, proline, cysteine, and tyrosine are the most
unstable to impact-related processing. These experiments suggest that impacts
alter biomolecule distributions on Titan's surface, and that organic hazes co-
occurring with fine-grained material on the surface may provide an initial
source for further prebiotic chemistry on Titan.
