Title: Comprehensive Lipidomic Automation Workflow using Large Language Models
Authors: Connor Beveridge, Sanjay Iyer, Caitlin E. Randolph, Matthew Muhoberac,
Palak Manchanda, Amy C. Clingenpeel, Shane Tichy, Gaurav Chopra
ID: 2403.15076
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.15076

Abstract:
Lipidomics generates large data that makes manual annotation and interpretation
challenging. Lipid chemical and structural diversity with structural isomers
further complicates annotation. Although, several commercial and open-source
software for targeted lipid identification exists, it lacks automated method
generation workflows and integration with statistical and bioinformatics tools.
We have developed the Comprehensive Lipidomic Automated Workflow (CLAW) platform
with integrated workflow for parsing, detailed statistical analysis and lipid
annotations based on custom multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) precursor and
product ion pair transitions. CLAW contains several modules including
identification of carbon-carbon double bond position(s) in unsaturated lipids
when combined with ozone electrospray ionization (OzESI)-MRM methodology. To
demonstrate the utility of the automated workflow in CLAW, large-scale
lipidomics data was collected with traditional and OzESI-MRM profiling on
biological and non-biological samples. Specifically, a total of 1497 transitions
organized into 10 MRM-based mass spectrometry methods were used to profile lipid
droplets isolated from different brain regions of 18-24 month-old Alzheimer's
disease mice and age-matched wild-type controls. Additionally, triacyclglycerols
(TGs) profiles with carbon-carbon double bond specificity were generated from
canola oil samples using OzESI-MRM profiling. We also developed an integrated
language user interface with large language models using artificially
intelligent (AI) agents that permits users to interact with the CLAW platform
using a chatbot terminal to perform statistical and bioinformatic analyses. We
envision CLAW pipeline to be used in high-throughput lipid structural
identification tasks aiding users to generate automated lipidomics workflows
ranging from data acquisition to AI agent-based bioinformatic analysis.
