Title: Self-Clustering Hierarchical Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with
Extensible Cooperation Graph
Authors: Qingxu Fu, Tenghai Qiu, Jianqiang Yi, Zhiqiang Pu, Xiaolin Ai
ID: 2403.18056
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.18056

Abstract:
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has been successful in solving many
cooperative challenges. However, classic non-hierarchical MARL algorithms still
cannot address various complex multi-agent problems that require hierarchical
cooperative behaviors. The cooperative knowledge and policies learned in non-
hierarchical algorithms are implicit and not interpretable, thereby restricting
the integration of existing knowledge. This paper proposes a novel hierarchical
MARL model called Hierarchical Cooperation Graph Learning (HCGL) for solving
general multi-agent problems. HCGL has three components: a dynamic Extensible
Cooperation Graph (ECG) for achieving self-clustering cooperation; a group of
graph operators for adjusting the topology of ECG; and an MARL optimizer for
training these graph operators. HCGL's key distinction from other MARL models is
that the behaviors of agents are guided by the topology of ECG instead of policy
neural networks. ECG is a three-layer graph consisting of an agent node layer, a
cluster node layer, and a target node layer. To manipulate the ECG topology in
response to changing environmental conditions, four graph operators are trained
to adjust the edge connections of ECG dynamically. The hierarchical feature of
ECG provides a unique approach to merge primitive actions (actions executed by
the agents) and cooperative actions (actions executed by the clusters) into a
unified action space, allowing us to integrate fundamental cooperative knowledge
into an extensible interface. In our experiments, the HCGL model has shown
outstanding performance in multi-agent benchmarks with sparse rewards. We also
verify that HCGL can easily be transferred to large-scale scenarios with high
zero-shot transfer success rates.
