Title: A Scoping Review of Energy-Efficient Driving Behaviors and Applied State-
of-the-Art AI Methods
Authors: Zhipeng Ma, Bo Nørregaard Jørgensen, Zheng Ma
ID: 2403.02053
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.02053

Abstract:
The transportation sector remains a major contributor to greenhouse gas
emissions. The understanding of energy-efficient driving behaviors and
utilization of energy-efficient driving strategies are essential to reduce
vehicles' fuel consumption. However, there is no comprehensive investigation
into energy-efficient driving behaviors and strategies. Furthermore, many state-
of-the-art AI models have been applied for the analysis of eco-friendly driving
styles, but no overview is available. To fill the gap, this paper conducts a
thorough literature review on ecological driving behaviors and styles and
analyzes the driving factors influencing energy consumption and state-of-the-art
methodologies. With a thorough scoping review process, the methodological and
related data are compared. The results show that the factors that impact driving
behaviors can be summarized into eleven features including speed, acceleration,
deceleration, pedal, and so on. This paper finds that supervised/unsupervised
learning algorithms and reinforcement learning frameworks have been popularly
used to model the vehicle's energy consumption with multi-dimensional data.
Furthermore, the literature shows that the driving data are collected from
either simulators or real-world experiments, and the real-world data are mainly
stored and transmitted by meters, controller area networks, onboard data
services, smartphones, and additional sensors installed in the vehicle. Based on
driving behavior factors, driver characteristics, and safety rules, this paper
recommends nine energy-efficient driving styles including four guidelines for
the drivers' selection and adjustment of the vehicle parameters, three
recommendations for the energy-efficient driving styles in different driving
scenarios, and two subjective suggestions for different types of drivers and
employers.
