Title: Scalable and Versatile Linear Computation with Minimalistic Photonic
Matrix Processor
Authors: Zhaoang Deng, Zhenhua Li, Jie Liu, Chuyao Bian, Jiaqing Li, Ranfeng
Gan, Zihao Chen, Kaixuan Chen, Changjian Guo, Liu Liu, Siyuan Yu
ID: 2403.04216
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.04216

Abstract:
The advancement of artificial intelligence demands flexible multimodal data
processing with high throughput and energy efficiency. Photonic integrated
circuits (PIC) has demonstrated promising potentials in terms of low latency and
low power consumption per operation for linear operations such as matrix-vector
multiplication. However, the existing schemes face challenges in their
scalability due to the use of photonic circuits that expand with the scale of
the operants, despite efforts of exploiting the multiple optical parameter
dimensions such as time, wavelength and spatial parallelism. They also lacked
flexibility and efficiency in switching between different types of operations or
tasks and adapting to multimodal data. In this article, we introduce an optical
matrix processor (MP) with a minimalistic recursive structure for both
multiplications and accumulations. The MP consists of an eletro-optic ring-
modulator implemented as a thin-film lithium niobate PIC that allows flexible
configurability and time-division multiplexed scheduling. The MP supports not
only versatile linear operations including vector/matrix-vector multiplication
and single/multi-kernel convolution but also ultrafast task switching and
adaptability to data of different sizes, by simply adjusting the data baud rate
relative to the ring delay without structural modifications. We demonstrate its
capabilities in a optic-electronic convolutional neural network with a computing
throughput up to 73.4 billion operations per second. The MP further supports
high scalability through appropriate allocation of wavelength and space
resources,extending computing parallelism to handle higher data volumes with
higher energy efficiency. This novel scheme paves the way for a new class of
photonic processorscapable of managing escalating data workloads with
unprecedented flexibility, efficiency and scalability.
