Title: A Roadmap Towards Automated and Regulated Robotic Systems
Authors: Yihao Liu, Mehran Armand
ID: 2403.14049
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.14049

Abstract:
The rapid development of generative technology opens up possibility for higher
level of automation, and artificial intelligence (AI) embodiment in robotic
systems is imminent. However, due to the blackbox nature of the generative
technology, the generation of the knowledge and workflow scheme is uncontrolled,
especially in a dynamic environment and a complex scene. This poses challenges
to regulations in safety-demanding applications such as medical scenes. We argue
that the unregulated generative processes from AI is fitted for low level end
tasks, but intervention in the form of manual or automated regulation should
happen post-workflow-generation and pre-robotic-execution. To address this, we
propose a roadmap that can lead to fully automated and regulated robotic
systems. In this paradigm, the high level policies are generated as structured
graph data, enabling regulatory oversight and reusability, while the code base
for lower level tasks is generated by generative models. Our approach aims the
transitioning from expert knowledge to regulated action, akin to the iterative
processes of study, practice, scrutiny, and execution in human tasks. We
identify the generative and deterministic processes in a design cycle, where
generative processes serve as a text-based world simulator and the deterministic
processes generate the executable system. We propose State Machine Seralization
Language (SMSL) to be the conversion point between text simulator and executable
workflow control. From there, we analyze the modules involved based on the
current literature, and discuss human in the loop. As a roadmap, this work
identifies the current possible implementation and future work. This work does
not provide an implemented system but envisions to inspire the researchers
working on the direction in the roadmap. We implement the SMSL and D-SFO
paradigm that serve as the starting point of the roadmap.
