Title: DeepGleason: a System for Automated Gleason Grading of Prostate Cancer
using Deep Neural Networks
Authors: Dominik Müller, Philip Meyer, Lukas Rentschler, Robin Manz, Jonas
Bäcker, Samantha Cramer, Christoph Wengenmayr, Bruno Märkl, Ralf Huss, Iñaki
Soto-Rey, Johannes Raffler
ID: 2403.16678
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.16678

Abstract:
Advances in digital pathology and artificial intelligence (AI) offer promising
opportunities for clinical decision support and enhancing diagnostic workflows.
Previous studies already demonstrated AI's potential for automated Gleason
grading, but lack state-of-the-art methodology and model reusability. To address
this issue, we propose DeepGleason: an open-source deep neural network based
image classification system for automated Gleason grading using whole-slide
histopathology images from prostate tissue sections. Implemented with the
standardized AUCMEDI framework, our tool employs a tile-wise classification
approach utilizing fine-tuned image preprocessing techniques in combination with
a ConvNeXt architecture which was compared to various state-of-the-art
architectures. The neural network model was trained and validated on an in-house
dataset of 34,264 annotated tiles from 369 prostate carcinoma slides. We
demonstrated that DeepGleason is capable of highly accurate and reliable Gleason
grading with a macro-averaged F1-score of 0.806, AUC of 0.991, and Accuracy of
0.974. The internal architecture comparison revealed that the ConvNeXt model was
superior performance-wise on our dataset to established and other modern
architectures like transformers. Furthermore, we were able to outperform the
current state-of-the-art in tile-wise fine-classification with a sensitivity and
specificity of 0.94 and 0.98 for benign vs malignant detection as well as of
0.91 and 0.75 for Gleason 3 vs Gleason 4 & 5 classification, respectively. Our
tool contributes to the wider adoption of AI-based Gleason grading within the
research community and paves the way for broader clinical application of deep
learning models in digital pathology. DeepGleason is open-source and publicly
available for research application in the following Git repository:
https://github.com/frankkramer-lab/DeepGleason.
