Title: Current laboratory performance of starlight suppression systems, and
potential pathways to desired Habitable Worlds Observatory exoplanet science
capabilities
Authors: Bertrand Mennesson, Ruslan Belikov, Emiel Por, Eugene Serabyn, Garreth
Ruane, A. J. Eldorado Riggs, Dan Sirbu, Laurent Pueyo, Remi Soummer, Jeremy
Kasdin, Stuart Shaklan, Byoung-Joon Seo, Christopher Stark, Eric Cady, Pin Chen,
Brendan Crill, Kevin Fogarty, Alexandra Greenbaum, Olivier Guyon, Roser Juanola-
Parramon, Brian Kern, John Krist, Bruce Macintosh, David Marx, Dimitri Mawet,
Camilo Mejia Prada, Rhonda Morgan, Bijan Nemati, Leonid Pogorelyuk, Susan
Redmond, Sara Seager, Nicholas Siegler, Karl Stapelfeldt, Sarah Steiger, John
Trauger, a James K. Wallace Marie Ygouf, Neil Zimmerman
ID: 2404.18036
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.18036

Abstract:
We summarize the current best polychromatic (10 to 20 % bandwidth) contrast
performance demonstrated in the laboratory by different starlight suppression
approaches and systems designed to directly characterize exoplanets around
nearby stars. We present results obtained by internal coronagraph and external
starshade experimental testbeds using entrance apertures equivalent to off-axis
or on-axis telescopes, either monolithic or segmented. For a given angular
separation and spectral bandwidth, the performance of each starlight suppression
system is characterized by the values of raw contrast (before image processing),
off-axis (exoplanet) core throughput, and post-calibration contrast (the final 1
sigma detection limit of off-axis point sources, after image processing). To
place the current laboratory results in the perspective of the future Habitable
Worlds Observatory (HWO) mission, we simulate visible observations of a fiducial
Earth/Sun twin system at 12 pc, assuming a 6m (inscribed diameter) collecting
aperture and a realistic end-to-end optical throughput. The exposure times
required for broadband exoearth detection (20% bandwidth around a wavelength of
0.55 microns) and visible spectroscopic observations (R=70) are then computed
assuming various levels of starlight suppression performance, including the
values currently demonstrated in the laboratory. Using spectroscopic exposure
time as a simple metric, our results point to key starlight suppression system
design performance improvements and trades to be conducted in support of HWO
exoplanet science capabilities. These trades may be explored via numerical
studies, lab experiments, as well as high contrast space-based observations and
demonstrations.
