Title: The Most Common Habitable Planets III -- Modeling Temperature Forcing and
Surface Conditions on Rocky Exoplanets and Exomoons
Authors: Beatriz B. Siffert, Raquel G. Gonçalves Farias, Matias Garcia, Luiz
Felipe Melo de Menezes, Gustavo F. Porto de Mello, Marcelo Borges Fernandes,
Rafael Pinotti
ID: 2404.17448
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.17448

Abstract:
Small rocky planets, as well as larger planets that suffered extensive volatile
loss, tend to be drier and have thinner atmospheres as compared to Earth. Such
planets probably outnumber worlds better endowed with volatiles, being the most
common habitable planets. For the subgroup of fast rotators following eccentric
orbits, atmospheres suffer radiative forcing and their heat capacity provides a
method for gauging atmospheric thickness and surface conditions. We further
explore the model presented in a previous paper and apply it to real and
hypothetical exoplanets in the habitable zone of various classes of stars,
simulating atmospheric and orbital characteristics. For planetary eccentricities
e ~0.3, the forcing-induced hypothetical temperature variation would reach ~80 K
for airless planets and ~10 K for planets with substantial atmospheres. For
Kepler-186 f and Kepler-442 b, assuming e ~0.1, temperature variations can reach
~24 K. We also consider habitable exomoons in circular orbits around gas giants
within the habitable zone, which suffer radiative forcing due to their epicyclic
motion. We study several combinations of parameters for the characterization of
planets (mass, eccentricity and semi-major axis) and exomoons (mass, orbital
radius, albedo and atmospheric characteristics) for different stellar types. For
e ~0.3, exomoon temperature varies up to ~90 K, while for ~0.6 variations can
reach ~200 K. Such exomoons may plausibly retain their volatiles by continued
volcanic activity fueled by tidal dissipation. Although currently undetectable,
such effects might be within reach of future Extremely Large Telescope-class
telescopes and space missions with mid-infrared and coronagraphic capabilities.
