Title: Generalizing Space Logistics Network Optimization with Integrated Machine
Learning and Mathematical Programming
Authors: Koki Ho, Yuri Shimane, Masafumi Isaji
ID: 2404.18770
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.18770

Abstract:
Recent growing complexity in space missions has led to an active research field
of space logistics and mission design. This research field leverages the key
ideas and methods used to handle complex terrestrial logistics to tackle space
logistics design problems. A typical goal in space logistics is to optimize the
commodity flow to satisfy some mission objectives with the lowest cost. One of
the successful space logistics approaches is network flow modeling and
optimization using mixed-integer linear programming (MILP). A caveat of the
conventional MILP-based network approach for space logistics is its incapability
of handling nonlinearity. For example, in the MILP formulation, the spacecraft
structure mass and fuel/payload capacity are approximated by a linear
relationship. However, this oversimplified relationship cannot characterize a
realistic spacecraft design. Other types of nonlinearity can appear when a
nonlinear time-dependent trajectory model is considered in an event-driven
network, where the time step of each event itself is a variable. In response to
this challenge, this Note develops a new systematic general framework to handle
nonlinearity in the MILP-based space logistics formulation using machine
learning (ML). Specifically, we replace the nonlinear constraints in the space
logistics formulation with trained ML models that are compatible with MILP. The
MILP-compatible ML model includes linear regression, PWL approximations, neural
networks (NN) with Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activations, decision tree
regression, and random forest regression, among others; these models can be
translated into MILP formulations with a definition of additional variables and
constraints while maintaining the linearity. This Note provides the first
demonstration of using such trained ML models directly in a MILP-based space
logistics optimization formulation.
