Title: Autonomous Artificial Intelligence Agents for Clinical Decision Making in
Oncology
Authors: Dyke Ferber, Omar S. M. El Nahhas, Georg Wölflein, Isabella C. Wiest,
Jan Clusmann, Marie-Elisabeth Leßman, Sebastian Foersch, Jacqueline Lammert,
Maximilian Tschochohei, Dirk Jäger, Manuel Salto-Tellez, Nikolaus Schultz,
Daniel Truhn, Jakob Nikolas Kather
ID: 2404.04667
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.04667

Abstract:
Multimodal artificial intelligence (AI) systems have the potential to enhance
clinical decision-making by interpreting various types of medical data. However,
the effectiveness of these models across all medical fields is uncertain. Each
discipline presents unique challenges that need to be addressed for optimal
performance. This complexity is further increased when attempting to integrate
different fields into a single model. Here, we introduce an alternative approach
to multimodal medical AI that utilizes the generalist capabilities of a large
language model (LLM) as a central reasoning engine. This engine autonomously
coordinates and deploys a set of specialized medical AI tools. These tools
include text, radiology and histopathology image interpretation, genomic data
processing, web searches, and document retrieval from medical guidelines. We
validate our system across a series of clinical oncology scenarios that closely
resemble typical patient care workflows. We show that the system has a high
capability in employing appropriate tools (97%), drawing correct conclusions
(93.6%), and providing complete (94%), and helpful (89.2%) recommendations for
individual patient cases while consistently referencing relevant literature
(82.5%) upon instruction. This work provides evidence that LLMs can effectively
plan and execute domain-specific models to retrieve or synthesize new
information when used as autonomous agents. This enables them to function as
specialist, patient-tailored clinical assistants. It also simplifies regulatory
compliance by allowing each component tool to be individually validated and
approved. We believe, that our work can serve as a proof-of-concept for more
advanced LLM-agents in the medical domain.
