Title: Biosignatures from pre-oxygen photosynthesising life on TRAPPIST-1e
Authors: Jake K. Eager-Nash, Stuart J. Daines, James W. McDermott, Peter
Andrews, Lucy A. Grain, James Bishop, Aaron A. Rogers, Jack W. G. Smith, Chadiga
Khalek, Thomas J. Boxer, Mei Ting Mak, Robert J. Ridgway, Eric Hebrard, F. Hugo
Lambert, Timothy M. Lenton, Nathan J. Mayne
ID: 2404.11611
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.11611

Abstract:
In order to assess observational evidence for potential atmospheric
biosignatures on exoplanets, it will be essential to test whether spectral
fingerprints from multiple gases can be explained by abiotic or biotic-only
processes. Here, we develop and apply a coupled 1D atmosphere-ocean-ecosystem
model to understand how primitive biospheres, which exploit abiotic sources of
H2, CO and O2, could influence the atmospheric composition of rocky terrestrial
exoplanets. We apply this to the Earth at 3.8 Ga and to TRAPPIST-1e. We focus on
metabolisms that evolved before the evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis, which
consume H2 and CO and produce potentially detectable levels of CH4. O2-consuming
metabolisms are also considered for TRAPPIST-1e, as abiotic O2 production is
predicted on M-dwarf orbiting planets. We show that these biospheres can lead to
high levels of surface O2 (approximately 1-5 %) as a result of \ch{CO}
consumption, which could allow high O2 scenarios, by removing the main loss
mechanisms of atomic oxygen. Increasing stratospheric temperatures, which
increases atmospheric OH can reduce the likelihood of such a state forming.
O2-consuming metabolisms could also lower O2 levels to around 10 ppm and support
a productive biosphere at low reductant inputs. Using predicted transmission
spectral features from CH4, CO, O2/O3 and CO2 across the hypothesis space for
tectonic reductant input, we show that biotically-produced CH4 may only be
detectable at high reductant inputs. CO is also likely to be a dominant feature
in transmission spectra for planets orbiting M-dwarfs, which could reduce the
confidence in any potential biosignature observations linked to these
biospheres.
