Title: Modelling the Impact of Quantum Circuit Imperfections on Networks and
Computer Applications
Authors: Savo Glisic
ID: 2404.00062
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.00062

Abstract:
Post Quantum and Quantum Cryptography schemes are feasible quantum computer
applications for 7G networks. These schemes could possibly replace existing
schemes. These algorithms have been compromised by advances in quantum search
algorithms run on quantum computers like Shor algorithm. Shor algorithm is a
quantum algorithm for finding the prime factors of an integer which is the basis
of existing algorithm. This has become an available quantum computer application
putting the use of ESA algorithm at risk. Our recent paper provides a detailed
survey of the work on post quantum and quantum cryptography algorithms with
focus on their applicability in 7G networks.
  Since the paper focuses on the cryptography algorithms as a follow up, in this
paper, we provide a new framework for quantum network optimization and survey in
detail the work on enabling technologies (quantum hardware) for the practical
implementation of these algorithms including the most important segments of
quantum hardware in 7G. As always in engineering practice practical solutions
are a compromise between the performance and complexity of the implementation.
For this reason, as the main contribution, the paper presents a network and
computer applications optimization framework that includes implementation
imperfections. The tools should be useful in optimizing future generation
practical computer system design. After that a comprehensive survey of the
existing work on quantum hardware is presented pointing out the sources of these
imperfections. This enables us to make a fair assessment of how much investment
into quantum hardware improvements contributes to the performance enhancement of
the overall system. In this way a decision can be made on proper partitioning
between the investment in hardware and system level complexity.
