Title: The Jive Verification System and its Transformative Impact on Weather
Forecasting Operations
Authors: Nicholas Loveday, Deryn Griffiths, Tennessee Leeuwenburg, Robert
Taggart, Thomas C. Pagano, George Cheng, Kevin Plastow, Elizabeth Ebert,
Cassandra Templeton, Maree Carroll, Mohammadreza Khanarmuei, Isha Nagpal
ID: 2404.18429
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.18429

Abstract:
Forecast verification is critical for continuous improvement in meteorological
organizations. The Jive verification system was originally developed to assess
the accuracy of public weather forecasts issued by the Australian Bureau of
Meteorology. It started as a research project in 2015 and gradually evolved to
be a Bureau operational verification system in 2022. The system includes daily
verification dashboards for forecasters to visualize recent forecast performance
and "Evidence Targeted Automation" dashboards for exploring the performance of
competing forecast systems. Additionally, Jive includes a Jupyter Notebook
server with the Jive Python library which supports research experiments, case
studies, and the development of new verification metrics and tools. This paper
describes the Jive verification system and how it helped bring verification to
the forefront at the Bureau of Meteorology, leading to more accurate,
streamlined forecasts. Jive has provided evidence to support forecast automation
decisions and has helped to understand the evolving role of meteorologists in
the forecast process. It has given operational meteorologists tools for
evaluating forecast processes, including identifying when and how manual
interventions lead to superior predictions. Work on Jive led to new verification
science, including novel metrics that are decision-focused, including
diagnostics for extreme conditions. Jive also provided the Bureau with an
enterprise-wide data analysis environment and has prompted a clarification of
forecast definitions. These collective impacts have resulted in more accurate
forecasts, ultimately benefiting society, and building trust with forecast
users. These positive outcomes highlight the importance of meteorological
organizations investing in verification science and technology.
