Title: Classifying binary black holes from Population III stars with the
Einstein Telescope: A machine-learning approach
Authors: Filippo Santoliquido, Ulyana Dupletsa, Jacopo Tissino, Marica
Branchesi, Francesco Iacovelli, Giuliano Iorio, Michela Mapelli, Davide Gerosa,
Jan Harms, Mario Pasquato
ID: 2404.10048
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.10048

Abstract:
Third-generation (3G) gravitational-wave detectors such as the Einstein
Telescope (ET) will observe binary black hole (BBH) mergers at redshifts up to
$z\sim 100$. However, an unequivocal determination of the origin of high-
redshift sources will remain uncertain because of the low signal-to-noise ratio
(S/N) and poor estimate of their luminosity distance. This study proposes a
machine-learning approach to infer the origins of high-redshift BBHs. We
specifically differentiate those arising from Population III (Pop. III) stars,
which probably are the first progenitors of star-born BBH mergers in the
Universe, and those originated from Population I-II (Pop. I-II) stars. We
considered a wide range of models that encompass the current uncertainties on
Pop. III BBH mergers. We then estimated the parameter errors of the detected
sources with ET using the Fisher information-matrix formalism, followed by a
classification using XGBoost, which is a machine-learning algorithm based on
decision trees. For a set of mock observed BBHs, we provide the probability that
they belong to the Pop. III class while considering the parameter errors of each
source. In our fiducial model, we accurately identify $\gtrsim 10\%$ of the
detected BBHs that originate from Pop. III stars with a precision $>90\%$. Our
study demonstrates that machine-learning enables us to achieve some pivotal
aspects of the ET science case by exploring the origin of individual high-
redshift GW observations. We set the basis for further studies, which will
integrate additional simulated populations and account for further uncertainties
in the population modeling.
