Title: Deep learning to detect gravitational waves from binary close encounters:
Fast parameter estimation using normalizing flows
Authors: Federico De Santi, Massimiliano Razzano, Francesco Fidecaro, Luca
Muccillo, Lucia Papalini, Barbara Patricelli
ID: 2404.12028
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.12028

Abstract:
A yet undetected class of GW signals is represented by the close encounters
between compact objects in highly-eccentric e~1 orbits, that can occur in binary
systems formed in dense environments such as globular clusters. The expected
gravitational signals are short-duration pulses that would repeat over a much
longer time scale in case of multiple passages at periastron. These sources
represent a unique opportunity of exploring astrophysical formation channels as
well as a different way of testing GR. In the case of binary systems containing
neutron stars, the observation of these sources could help to constrain the EOS,
thanks to the signature left in the GW signal by the f-modes excitation that can
occur during the encounter. The detection and PE of these signals is challenging
given the short duration of expected signals and the sensitivities of current
ground-based GW interferometers. We present a novel approach that exploits
Probabilistic ML. We have used Conditional Normalizing Flows to model complex
probability distributions and therefore infer posterior distributions for the
source parameters. Fast detection and PE is very important as it could trigger
electromagnetic follow-up campaigns and offer the possibility to study these
events in a multimessenger context. To develop and test the algorithm, we have
focused on the simulations of single bursts emission obtained using the
Effective Fly-by formalism and embedded in the noise of aLIGO and Virgo during
O3. Our proposed model outperforms standard Bayesian methods in accuracy and is
5 orders of magnitude faster, being able to produce 5x10^4 posterior samples in
just 0.5s. The results are extremely promising and constitute the first
successful attempt for a fast and complete parameter estimation of binary CEs
using deep learning, offering a new approach to study the evolution of orbital
parameters of compact binary systems.
