Title: Cosmic topology. Part IVa. Classification of manifolds using machine
learning: a case study with small toroidal universes
Authors: Andrius Tamosiunas, Fernando Cornet-Gomez, Yashar Akrami, Stefano
Anselmi, Javier Carrón Duque, Craig J. Copi, Johannes R. Eskilt, Özenç Güngör,
Andrew H. Jaffe, Arthur Kosowsky, Mikel Martin Barandiaran, James B. Mertens,
Deyan P. Mihaylov, Thiago S. Pereira, Samanta Saha, Amirhossein Samandar, Glenn
D. Starkman, Quinn Taylor, Valeri Vardanyan
ID: 2404.01236
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.01236

Abstract:
Non-trivial spatial topology of the Universe may give rise to potentially
measurable signatures in the cosmic microwave background. We explore different
machine learning approaches to classify harmonic-space realizations of the
microwave background in the test case of Euclidean $E_1$ topology (the 3-torus)
with a cubic fundamental domain of a size scale significantly smaller than the
diameter of the last scattering surface. This is the first step toward
developing a machine learning approach to classification of cosmic topology and
likelihood-free inference of topological parameters. Different machine learning
approaches are capable of classifying the harmonic-space realizations with
accuracy greater than 99% if the topology scale is half of the diameter of the
last-scattering surface and orientation of the topology is known. For
distinguishing random rotations of these sky realizations from realizations of
the covering space, the extreme gradient boosting classifier algorithm performs
best with an accuracy of 88%. Slightly lower accuracies of 83% to 87% are
obtained with the random forest classifier along with one- and two-dimensional
convolutional neural networks. The techniques presented here can also accurately
classify non-rotated cubic $E_1$ topology realizations with a topology scale
slightly larger than the diameter of the last-scattering surface, if enough
training data are provided. While information compressing methods like most
machine learning approaches cannot exceed the statistical power of a likelihood-
based approach that captures all available information, they potentially offer a
computationally cheaper alternative. A principle challenge appears to be
accounting for arbitrary orientations of a given topology, although this is also
a significant hurdle for likelihood-based approaches.
