Title: Assessing the Potential of AI for Spatially Sensitive Nature-Related
Financial Risks
Authors: Steven Reece, Emma O'Donnell, Felicia Liu, Joanna Wolstenholme, Frida
Arriaga, Giacomo Ascenzi, Richard Pywell
ID: 2404.17369
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.17369

Abstract:
There is growing recognition among financial institutions, financial regulators
and policy makers of the importance of addressing nature-related risks and
opportunities. Evaluating and assessing nature-related risks for financial
institutions is challenging due to the large volume of heterogeneous data
available on nature and the complexity of investment value chains and the
various components' relationship to nature. The dual problem of scaling data
analytics and analysing complex systems can be addressed using Artificial
Intelligence (AI). We address issues such as plugging existing data gaps with
discovered data, data estimation under uncertainty, time series analysis and
(near) real-time updates. This report presents potential AI solutions for models
of two distinct use cases, the Brazil Beef Supply Use Case and the Water Utility
Use Case. Our two use cases cover a broad perspective within sustainable
finance. The Brazilian cattle farming use case is an example of greening finance
- integrating nature-related considerations into mainstream financial decision-
making to transition investments away from sectors with poor historical track
records and unsustainable operations. The deployment of nature-based solutions
in the UK water utility use case is an example of financing green - driving
investment to nature-positive outcomes. The two use cases also cover different
sectors, geographies, financial assets and AI modelling techniques, providing an
overview on how AI could be applied to different challenges relating to nature's
integration into finance. This report is primarily aimed at financial
institutions but is also of interest to ESG data providers, TNFD, systems
modellers, and, of course, AI practitioners.
