Title: VASARI-auto: equitable, efficient, and economical featurisation of glioma
MRI
Authors: James K Ruffle, Samia Mohinta, Kelly Pegoretti Baruteau, Rebekah
Rajiah, Faith Lee, Sebastian Brandner, Parashkev Nachev, Harpreet Hyare
ID: 2404.15318
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.15318

Abstract:
The VASARI MRI feature set is a quantitative system designed to standardise
glioma imaging descriptions. Though effective, deriving VASARI is time-consuming
and seldom used in clinical practice. This is a problem that machine learning
could plausibly automate. Using glioma data from 1172 patients, we developed
VASARI-auto, an automated labelling software applied to both open-source lesion
masks and our openly available tumour segmentation model. In parallel, two
consultant neuroradiologists independently quantified VASARI features in a
subsample of 100 glioblastoma cases. We quantified: 1) agreement across
neuroradiologists and VASARI-auto; 2) calibration of performance equity; 3) an
economic workforce analysis; and 4) fidelity in predicting patient survival.
Tumour segmentation was compatible with the current state of the art and equally
performant regardless of age or sex. A modest inter-rater variability between
in-house neuroradiologists was comparable to between neuroradiologists and
VASARI-auto, with far higher agreement between VASARI-auto methods. The time
taken for neuroradiologists to derive VASARI was substantially higher than
VASARI-auto (mean time per case 317 vs. 3 seconds). A UK hospital workforce
analysis forecast that three years of VASARI featurisation would demand 29,777
consultant neuroradiologist workforce hours (£1,574,935), reducible to 332 hours
of computing time (and £146 of power) with VASARI-auto. The best-performing
survival model utilised VASARI-auto features as opposed to those derived by
neuroradiologists. VASARI-auto is a highly efficient automated labelling system
with equitable performance across patient age or sex, a favourable economic
profile if used as a decision support tool, and with non-inferior fidelity in
downstream patient survival prediction. Future work should iterate upon and
integrate such tools to enhance patient care.
