Title: Multivariate post-processing of probabilistic sub-seasonal weather regime
forecasts
Authors: Fabian Mockert, Christian M. Grams, Sebastian Lerch, Marisol Osman,
Julian Quinting
ID: 2404.01895
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.01895

Abstract:
Reliable forecasts of quasi-stationary, recurrent, and persistent large-scale
atmospheric circulation patterns (weather regimes) are crucial for various
socio-economic sectors. Despite steady progress, probabilistic weather regime
predictions still exhibit biases in the exact timing and amplitude of weather
regimes. This study thus aims at advancing probabilistic weather regime
predictions in the North Atlantic-European region through ensemble post-
processing. Here, we focus on the representation of seven year-round weather
regimes in the sub-seasonal to seasonal reforecasts of the European Centre for
Medium-Range Weather Forecasts. The manifestation of each of the seven regimes
can be expressed by a continuous weather regime index, representing the
projection of the instantaneous 500-hPa geopotential height anomalies (Z500A)
onto the respective mean regime pattern. We apply a two-step ensemble post-
processing involving first univariate ensemble model output statistics and
second ensemble copula coupling, which restores the multivariate dependency
structure. Compared to current forecast calibration practices, which rely on
correcting the Z500 field by the lead time dependent mean bias, our approach
extends the forecast skill horizon for daily/instantaneous regime forecasts
moderately by 1.2 days to 14.5 days. Additionally, to our knowledge our study is
the first to systematically evaluate the multivariate aspects of forecast
quality for weather regime forecasts. Our method outperforms current practices
in the multivariate aspect, as measured by the energy and variogram score. Still
our study shows, that even with advanced post-processing weather regime
prediction becomes difficult beyond 14 days, which likely points towards
intrinsic limits of predictability for daily/instantaneous regime forecasts. The
proposed method can easily be applied to operational weather regime forecasts.
