Title: Electronic ferroelectricity in monolayer graphene for multifunctional
neuromorphic electronics
Authors: Le Zhang, Jing Ding, Hanxiao Xiang, Naitian Liu, Wenqiang Zhou, Linfeng
Wu, Na Xin, Kenji Watanabe, Takashi Taniguchi, Shuigang Xu
ID: 2404.03410
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.03410

Abstract:
Ferroelectricity is intriguing for its spontaneous electric polarization, which
is switchable by an external electric field. Expanding ferroelectric materials
to two-dimensional limit will provide versatile applications for the development
of next-generation nonvolatile devices. Conventional ferroelectricity requires
the materials consisting of at least two constituent elements associated with
polar crystalline structures. Monolayer graphene as an elementary two-
dimensional material unlikely exhibits ferroelectric order due to its highly
centrosymmetric hexagonal lattices. Nevertheless, two-dimensional moire
superlattices offer a powerful way to engineer diverse electronic orders in non-
polar materials. Here, we report the observations of electronic ferroelectricity
in monolayer graphene by introducing asymmetric moire superlattice at the
graphene/h-BN interface. Utilizing Hall measurements, the electric polarization
is identified to stem from electron-hole dipoles, suggesting the electronic
dynamics of the observed ferroelectricity. Standard polarization-electric field
hysteresis loops, as well as unconventional multiple switchable polarization
states, have been achieved. By in-situ comparing with control devices, we found
that the electronic ferroelectricity in graphene moire systems is independent of
layer number of graphene and the corresponding fine band structures.
Furthermore, we demonstrate the applications of this ferroelectric moire
structures in multi-state non-volatile data storage and the emulation of
versatile synaptic behaviors, including short-term plasticity, long-term
potentiation and long-term depression. This work not only enriches the
fundamental understanding of ferroelectricity, but also demonstrates the
promising applications of graphene in multi-state memories and neuromorphic
computing.
