Title: Planet Hunters TESS V: a planetary system around a binary star, including
a mini-Neptune in the habitable zone
Authors: Nora L. Eisner, Samuel K. Grunblatt, Oscar Barragán, Thea H. Faridani,
Chris Lintott, Suzanne Aigrain, Cole Johnston, Ian R. Mason, Keivan G. Stassun,
Megan Bedell, Andrew W. Boyle, David R. Ciardi, Catherine A. Clark, Guillaume
Hebrard, David W. Hogg, Steve B. Howell, Baptiste Klein, Joe Llama, Joshua N.
Winn, Lily L. Zhao, Joseph M. Akana Murphy, Corey Beard, Casey L. Brinkman,
Ashley Chontos, Pia Cortes-Zuleta, Xavier Delfosse, Steven Giacalone, Emily A.
Gilbert, Neda Heidari, Rae Holcomb, Jon M. Jenkins, Flavien Kiefer, Jack Lubin,
Eder Martioli, Alex S. Polanski, Nicholas Saunders, Sara Seager, Avi Shporer,
Dakotah Tyler, Judah Van Zandt, Safaa Alhassan, Daval J. Amratlal, Lais I.
Antonel, Simon L. S. Bentzen, Milton K. D. Bosch, David Bundy, Itayi Chitsiga,
Jérôme F. Delaunay, Xavier Doisy, Richard Ferstenou, Mark Fynø, James M. Geary,
Gerry Haynaly, Pete Hermes, Marc Huten, Sam Lee, Paul Metcalfe, Garry J.
Pennell, Joanna Puszkarska, Thomas Schäfer, Lisa Stiller, Christopher Tanner,
Allan Tarr, Andrew Wilkinson
ID: 2404.18997
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.18997

Abstract:
We report on the discovery and validation of a transiting long-period mini-
Neptune orbiting a bright (V = 9.0 mag) G dwarf (TOI 4633; R = 1.05 RSun, M =
1.10 MSun). The planet was identified in data from the Transiting Exoplanet
Survey Satellite by citizen scientists taking part in the Planet Hunters TESS
project. Modeling of the transit events yields an orbital period of 271.9445 +/-
0.0040 days and radius of 3.2 +/- 0.20 REarth. The Earth-like orbital period and
an incident flux of 1.56 +/- 0.2 places it in the optimistic habitable zone
around the star. Doppler spectroscopy of the system allowed us to place an upper
mass limit on the transiting planet and revealed a non-transiting planet
candidate in the system with a period of 34.15 +/- 0.15 days. Furthermore, the
combination of archival data dating back to 1905 with new high angular
resolution imaging revealed a stellar companion orbiting the primary star with
an orbital period of around 230 years and an eccentricity of about 0.9. The long
period of the transiting planet, combined with the high eccentricity and close
approach of the companion star makes this a valuable system for testing the
formation and stability of planets in binary systems.
