Title: Neuro-Symbolic Embedding for Short and Effective Feature Selection via
Autoregressive Generation
Authors: Nanxu Gong, Wangyang Ying, Dongjie Wang, Yanjie Fu
ID: 2404.17157
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.17157

Abstract:
Feature selection aims to identify the optimal feature subset for enhancing
downstream models. Effective feature selection can remove redundant features,
save computational resources, accelerate the model learning process, and improve
the model overall performance. However, existing works are often time-intensive
to identify the effective feature subset within high-dimensional feature spaces.
Meanwhile, these methods mainly utilize a single downstream task performance as
the selection criterion, leading to the selected subsets that are not only
redundant but also lack generalizability. To bridge these gaps, we reformulate
feature selection through a neuro-symbolic lens and introduce a novel generative
framework aimed at identifying short and effective feature subsets. More
specifically, we found that feature ID tokens of the selected subset can be
formulated as symbols to reflect the intricate correlations among features.
Thus, in this framework, we first create a data collector to automatically
collect numerous feature selection samples consisting of feature ID tokens,
model performance, and the measurement of feature subset redundancy. Building on
the collected data, an encoder-decoder-evaluator learning paradigm is developed
to preserve the intelligence of feature selection into a continuous embedding
space for efficient search. Within the learned embedding space, we leverage a
multi-gradient search algorithm to find more robust and generalized embeddings
with the objective of improving model performance and reducing feature subset
redundancy. These embeddings are then utilized to reconstruct the feature ID
tokens for executing the final feature selection. Ultimately, comprehensive
experiments and case studies are conducted to validate the effectiveness of the
proposed framework.
