Title: Balancing Progress and Responsibility: A Synthesis of Sustainability
Trade-Offs of AI-Based Systems
Authors: Apoorva Nalini Pradeep Kumar, Justus Bogner, Markus Funke, Patricia
Lago
ID: 2404.03995
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.03995

Abstract:
Recent advances in artificial intelligence (AI) capabilities have increased the
eagerness of companies to integrate AI into software systems. While AI can be
used to have a positive impact on several dimensions of sustainability, this is
often overshadowed by its potential negative influence. While many studies have
explored sustainability factors in isolation, there is insufficient holistic
coverage of potential sustainability benefits or costs that practitioners need
to consider during decision-making for AI adoption. We therefore aim to
synthesize trade-offs related to sustainability in the context of integrating AI
into software systems. We want to make the sustainability benefits and costs of
integrating AI more transparent and accessible for practitioners.
  The study was conducted in collaboration with a Dutch financial organization.
We first performed a rapid review that led to the inclusion of 151 research
papers. Afterward, we conducted six semi-structured interviews to enrich the
data with industry perspectives. The combined results showcase the potential
sustainability benefits and costs of integrating AI. The labels synthesized from
the review regarding potential sustainability benefits were clustered into 16
themes, with "energy management" being the most frequently mentioned one. 11
themes were identified in the interviews, with the top mentioned theme being
"employee wellbeing". Regarding sustainability costs, the review discovered
seven themes, with "deployment issues" being the most popular one, followed by
"ethics & society". "Environmental issues" was the top theme from the
interviews. Our results provide valuable insights to organizations and
practitioners for understanding the potential sustainability implications of
adopting AI.
