Title: Socialized Learning: A Survey of the Paradigm Shift for Edge Intelligence
in Networked Systems
Authors: Xiaofei Wang, Yunfeng Zhao, Chao Qiu, Qinghua Hu, Victor C. M. Leung
ID: 2404.13348
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.13348

Abstract:
Amidst the robust impetus from artificial intelligence (AI) and big data, edge
intelligence (EI) has emerged as a nascent computing paradigm, synthesizing AI
with edge computing (EC) to become an exemplary solution for unleashing the full
potential of AI services. Nonetheless, challenges in communication costs,
resource allocation, privacy, and security continue to constrain its proficiency
in supporting services with diverse requirements. In response to these issues,
this paper introduces socialized learning (SL) as a promising solution, further
propelling the advancement of EI. SL is a learning paradigm predicated on social
principles and behaviors, aimed at amplifying the collaborative capacity and
collective intelligence of agents within the EI system. SL not only enhances the
system's adaptability but also optimizes communication, and networking
processes, essential for distributed intelligence across diverse devices and
platforms. Therefore, a combination of SL and EI may greatly facilitate the
development of collaborative intelligence in the future network. This paper
presents the findings of a literature review on the integration of EI and SL,
summarizing the latest achievements in existing research on EI and SL.
Subsequently, we delve comprehensively into the limitations of EI and how it
could benefit from SL. Special emphasis is placed on the communication
challenges and networking strategies and other aspects within these systems,
underlining the role of optimized network solutions in improving system
efficiency. Based on these discussions, we elaborate in detail on three
integrated components: socialized architecture, socialized training, and
socialized inference, analyzing their strengths and weaknesses. Finally, we
identify some possible future applications of combining SL and EI, discuss open
problems and suggest some future research.
