Title: How far are AI-powered programming assistants from meeting developers'
needs?
Authors: Xin Tan, Xiao Long, Xianjun Ni, Yinghao Zhu, Jing Jiang, Li Zhang
ID: 2404.12000
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.12000

Abstract:
Recent In-IDE AI coding assistant tools (ACATs) like GitHub Copilot have
significantly impacted developers' coding habits. While some studies have
examined their effectiveness, there lacks in-depth investigation into the actual
assistance process. To bridge this gap, we simulate real development scenarios
encompassing three typical types of software development tasks and recruit 27
computer science students to investigate their behavior with three popular
ACATs. Our goal is to comprehensively assess ACATs' effectiveness, explore
characteristics of recommended code, identify reasons for modifications, and
understand users' challenges and expectations. To facilitate the study, we
develop an experimental platform that includes a data collection plugin for
VSCode IDE and provides functions for screen recording, code evaluation, and
automatic generation of personalized interview and survey questions. Through
analysis of the collected data, we find that ACATs generally enhance task
completion rates, reduce time, improve code quality, and increase self-perceived
productivity. However, the improvement is influenced by both the nature of
coding tasks and users' experience level. Notably, for experienced participants,
the use of ACATs may even increase completion time. We observe that "edited line
completion" is the most frequently recommended way, while "comments completion"
and "string completion" have the lowest acceptance rates. The primary reasons
for modifying recommended code are disparities between output formats and
requirements, flawed logic, and inconsistent code styles. In terms of challenges
and expectations, optimization of service access and help documentation is also
concerned by participants except for functionality and performance. Our study
provides valuable insights into the effectiveness and usability of ACATs,
informing further improvements in their design and implementation.
