Title: Probing Three-Dimensional Magnetic Fields: III -- Synchrotron Emission
and Machine Learning
Authors: Yue Hu, Alex Lazarian
ID: 2404.07806
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.07806

Abstract:
Synchrotron observation serves as a tool for studying magnetic fields in the
interstellar medium and intracluster medium, yet its ability to unveil three-
dimensional (3D) magnetic fields, meaning probing the field'splane-of-the-sky
(POS) orientation, inclination angle relative to the line of sight, and
magnetization from one observational data, remains largely underexplored.
Inspired by the latest insights into anisotropic magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)
turbulence, we found that synchrotron emission's intensity structures inherently
reflect this anisotropy, providing crucial information to aid in 3D magnetic
field studies: (i) the structure's elongation gives the magnetic field's POS
orientation and (ii) the structure's anisotropy degree and topology reveal the
inclination angle and magnetization. Capitalizing on this foundation, we
integrate a machine learning approach-Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)-to
extract this latent information, thereby facilitating the exploration of 3D
magnetic fields. The model is trained on synthetic synchrotron emission maps,
derived from 3D MHD turbulence simulations encompassing a range of sub-Alfvénic
to super-Alfvénic conditions. We show that the CNN is physically interpretable
and the CNN is capable of obtaining the POS orientation, inclination angle, and
magnetization. Additionally, we test the CNN against the noise effect and the
missing low-spatial frequency. We show that this CNN-based approach maintains a
high degree of robustness even when only high-spatial frequencies are
maintained. This renders the method particularly suitable for application to
interferometric data lacking single-dish measurements. We applied this trained
CNN to the synchrotron observations of a diffuse region. The CNN-predicted POS
magnetic field orientation shows a statistical agreement with that derived from
synchrotron polarization.
