Title: Introducing v0.5 of the AI Safety Benchmark from MLCommons
Authors: Bertie Vidgen, Adarsh Agrawal, Ahmed M. Ahmed, Victor Akinwande, Namir
Al-Nuaimi, Najla Alfaraj, Elie Alhajjar, Lora Aroyo, Trupti Bavalatti, Max
Bartolo, Borhane Blili-Hamelin, Kurt Bollacker, Rishi Bomassani, Marisa Ferrara
Boston, Siméon Campos, Kal Chakra, Canyu Chen, Cody Coleman, Zacharie Delpierre
Coudert, Leon Derczynski, Debojyoti Dutta, Ian Eisenberg, James Ezick, Heather
Frase, Brian Fuller, Ram Gandikota, Agasthya Gangavarapu, Ananya Gangavarapu,
James Gealy, Rajat Ghosh, James Goel, Usman Gohar, Sujata Goswami, Scott A.
Hale, Wiebke Hutiri, Joseph Marvin Imperial, Surgan Jandial, Nick Judd, Felix
Juefei-Xu, Foutse Khomh, Bhavya Kailkhura, Hannah Rose Kirk, Kevin Klyman, Chris
Knotz, Michael Kuchnik, Shachi H. Kumar, Srijan Kumar, Chris Lengerich, Bo Li,
Zeyi Liao, Eileen Peters Long, Victor Lu, Sarah Luger, Yifan Mai, Priyanka Mary
Mammen, Kelvin Manyeki, Sean McGregor, Virendra Mehta, Shafee Mohammed, Emanuel
Moss, Lama Nachman, Dinesh Jinenhally Naganna, Amin Nikanjam, Besmira Nushi,
Luis Oala, Iftach Orr, Alicia Parrish, Cigdem Patlak, William Pietri, Forough
Poursabzi-Sangdeh, Eleonora Presani, Fabrizio Puletti, Paul Röttger, Saurav
Sahay, Tim Santos, Nino Scherrer, Alice Schoenauer Sebag, Patrick Schramowski,
Abolfazl Shahbazi, Vin Sharma, Xudong Shen, Vamsi Sistla, Leonard Tang, Davide
Testuggine, Vithursan Thangarasa, Elizabeth Anne Watkins, Rebecca Weiss, Chris
Welty, Tyler Wilbers, Adina Williams, Carole-Jean Wu, Poonam Yadav, Xianjun
Yang, Yi Zeng, Wenhui Zhang, Fedor Zhdanov, Jiacheng Zhu, Percy Liang, Peter
Mattson, Joaquin Vanschoren
ID: 2404.12241
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.12241

Abstract:
This paper introduces v0.5 of the AI Safety Benchmark, which has been created by
the MLCommons AI Safety Working Group. The AI Safety Benchmark has been designed
to assess the safety risks of AI systems that use chat-tuned language models. We
introduce a principled approach to specifying and constructing the benchmark,
which for v0.5 covers only a single use case (an adult chatting to a general-
purpose assistant in English), and a limited set of personas (i.e., typical
users, malicious users, and vulnerable users). We created a new taxonomy of 13
hazard categories, of which 7 have tests in the v0.5 benchmark. We plan to
release version 1.0 of the AI Safety Benchmark by the end of 2024. The v1.0
benchmark will provide meaningful insights into the safety of AI systems.
However, the v0.5 benchmark should not be used to assess the safety of AI
systems. We have sought to fully document the limitations, flaws, and challenges
of v0.5. This release of v0.5 of the AI Safety Benchmark includes (1) a
principled approach to specifying and constructing the benchmark, which
comprises use cases, types of systems under test (SUTs), language and context,
personas, tests, and test items; (2) a taxonomy of 13 hazard categories with
definitions and subcategories; (3) tests for seven of the hazard categories,
each comprising a unique set of test items, i.e., prompts. There are 43,090 test
items in total, which we created with templates; (4) a grading system for AI
systems against the benchmark; (5) an openly available platform, and
downloadable tool, called ModelBench that can be used to evaluate the safety of
AI systems on the benchmark; (6) an example evaluation report which benchmarks
the performance of over a dozen openly available chat-tuned language models; (7)
a test specification for the benchmark.
