Title: SubDLe: identification of substructures in cosmological simulations with
deep learning
Authors: Michela Esposito, Stefano Borgani, Giuseppe Murante
ID: 2405.18257
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.18257

Abstract:
The identification of substructures within halos in cosmological hydrodynamical
simulations is a fundamental step to identify the simulated counterparts of real
objects, namely galaxies. For this reason, substructure finders play a crucial
role in extracting relevant information from the simulation outputs. They are
based on physically-motivated definitions of substructures, performing multiple
steps of particle-by-particle operations, thus computationally expensive. The
purpose of this work is to develop a fast algorithm to identify substructures in
simulations. The final aim, besides a faster production of subhalo catalogues,
is to provide an algorithm fast enough to be applied with a fine time-cadence
during the evolution of the simulations. We chose to apply the architecture of a
well known Fully Convolutional Network, U-Net, to the identification of
substructures within the mass density field of the simulation. We have developed
SubDLe (Substructure identification with Deep Learning), an algorithm which
combines a 3D generalization of U-Net and a Friends-of-Friends algorithm, and
trained it to reproduce the identification of substructures performed by the
SubFind algorithm in a set of zoom-in cosmological hydrodynamical simulations of
galaxy clusters. For the feasibility study presented in this work, we have
trained and tested SubDLe on galaxy clusters at $z=0$, using a NVIDIA P100 GPU.
We focused our tests on the version of the algorithm working on the
identification of purely stellar substructures, stellar SubDLe. Our stellar
SubDLe is capable of identifying the majority of galaxies in the challenging
high-density environment of galaxy clusters in short computing times. This
result has interesting implications in view of the possibility of integrating
fast subhalo finders within simulation codes, that can take advantage of
accelerators available on state-of-art computing nodes.
