Title: The Future of Office and Administrative Support Occupations in the Era of
Artificial Intelligence: A Bibliometric Analysis
Authors: Priyadarshini R. Pennathur, Valerie Boksa, Arunkumar Pennathur, Andrew
Kusiak, Beth Livingston
ID: 2405.03808
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.03808

Abstract:
The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics projects that by the year 2029, the United
States will lose a million jobs in the office and administrative support
occupations because technology, automation, and artificial intelligence (AI)
have the potential to substitute or replace the office and administrative
functions performed by office workers. Despite the potential impact AI will have
on office work and the important role office workers play in the American
economy, we have limited knowledge of the state of the art research in office
work at the intersection of emerging artificial intelligence technologies. In
this study, we conducted a bibliometric analysis of the scholarly literature at
the intersection of office work and artificial intelligence. We extracted
literature sources from Compendex and Scopus databases and used VOSviewer for
visualizing and quantifying our bibliometric analyses. Our findings from
keywords analysis indicate that office automation, humans, human-computer
interaction, and artificial intelligence occurred more frequently in the
scholarly literature and had high link strengths. Keyword clusters from co-
occurrence analysis indicate that intelligent buildings, robotics, and the
internet of things are emerging topics in the office work domain. The two
clusters related to ergonomics, worker characteristics, human performance, and
safety indicate the types of human factors concerns that are more widely studied
in office work settings. In summary, our findings on the state-of-the-art
research in office work indicate that more studies have been conducted on smart
buildings, robotics, and technology development for office work, compared to
studies on office workers and their professional development.
