Title: Deep Neural Operator Enabled Digital Twin Modeling for Additive
Manufacturing
Authors: Ning Liu, Xuxiao Li, Manoj R. Rajanna, Edward W. Reutzel, Brady Sawyer,
Prahalada Rao, Jim Lua, Nam Phan, Yue Yu
ID: 2405.09572
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.09572

Abstract:
A digital twin (DT), with the components of a physics-based model, a data-driven
model, and a machine learning (ML) enabled efficient surrogate, behaves as a
virtual twin of the real-world physical process. In terms of Laser Powder Bed
Fusion (L-PBF) based additive manufacturing (AM), a DT can predict the current
and future states of the melt pool and the resulting defects corresponding to
the input laser parameters, evolve itself by assimilating in-situ sensor data,
and optimize the laser parameters to mitigate defect formation. In this paper,
we present a deep neural operator enabled computational framework of the DT for
closed-loop feedback control of the L-PBF process. This is accomplished by
building a high-fidelity computational model to accurately represent the melt
pool states, an efficient surrogate model to approximate the melt pool solution
field, followed by an physics-based procedure to extract information from the
computed melt pool simulation that can further be correlated to the defect
quantities of interest (e.g., surface roughness). In particular, we leverage the
data generated from the high-fidelity physics-based model and train a series of
Fourier neural operator (FNO) based ML models to effectively learn the relation
between the input laser parameters and the corresponding full temperature field
of the melt pool. Subsequently, a set of physics-informed variables such as the
melt pool dimensions and the peak temperature can be extracted to compute the
resulting defects. An optimization algorithm is then exercised to control laser
input and minimize defects. On the other hand, the constructed DT can also
evolve with the physical twin via offline finetuning and online material
calibration. Finally, a probabilistic framework is adopted for uncertainty
quantification. The developed DT is envisioned to guide the AM process and
facilitate high-quality manufacturing.
