Title: How Far Are We From AGI: Are LLMs All We Need?
Authors: Tao Feng, Chuanyang Jin, Jingyu Liu, Kunlun Zhu, Haoqin Tu, Zirui
Cheng, Guanyu Lin, Jiaxuan You
ID: 2405.10313
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.10313

Abstract:
The evolution of artificial intelligence (AI) has profoundly impacted human
society, driving significant advancements in multiple sectors. AGI,
distinguished by its ability to execute diverse real-world tasks with efficiency
and effectiveness comparable to human intelligence, reflects a paramount
milestone in AI evolution. While existing studies have reviewed specific
advancements in AI and proposed potential paths to AGI, such as large language
models (LLMs), they fall short of providing a thorough exploration of AGI's
definitions, objectives, and developmental trajectories. Unlike previous survey
papers, this work goes beyond summarizing LLMs by addressing key questions about
our progress toward AGI and outlining the strategies essential for its
realization through comprehensive analysis, in-depth discussions, and novel
insights. We start by articulating the requisite capability frameworks for AGI,
integrating the internal, interface, and system dimensions. As the realization
of AGI requires more advanced capabilities and adherence to stringent
constraints, we further discuss necessary AGI alignment technologies to
harmonize these factors. Notably, we emphasize the importance of approaching AGI
responsibly by first defining the key levels of AGI progression, followed by the
evaluation framework that situates the status quo, and finally giving our
roadmap of how to reach the pinnacle of AGI. Moreover, to give tangible insights
into the ubiquitous impact of the integration of AI, we outline existing
challenges and potential pathways toward AGI in multiple domains. In sum,
serving as a pioneering exploration into the current state and future trajectory
of AGI, this paper aims to foster a collective comprehension and catalyze
broader public discussions among researchers and practitioners on AGI.
