Title: Synthesizing Proteins on the Graphics Card. Protein Folding and the
Limits of Critical AI Studies
Authors: Fabian Offert, Paul Kim, Qiaoyu Cai
ID: 2405.09788
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.09788

Abstract:
This paper investigates the application of the transformer architecture in
protein folding, as exemplified by DeepMind's AlphaFold project, and its
implications for the understanding of so-called large language models. The
prevailing discourse often assumes a ready-made analogy between proteins,
encoded as sequences of amino acids, and natural language, which we term the
language paradigm of computational (structural) biology. Instead of assuming
this analogy as given, we critically evaluate it to assess the kind of
knowledge-making afforded by the transformer architecture. We first trace the
analogy's emergence and historical development, carving out the influence of
structural linguistics on structural biology beginning in the mid-20th century.
We then examine three often overlooked preprocessing steps essential to the
transformer architecture, including subword tokenization, word embedding, and
positional encoding, to demonstrate its regime of representation based on
continuous, high-dimensional vector spaces, which departs from the discrete
nature of language. The successful deployment of transformers in protein
folding, we argue, discloses what we consider a non-linguistic approach to token
processing intrinsic to the architecture. We contend that through this non-
linguistic processing, the transformer architecture carves out unique
epistemological territory and produces a new class of knowledge, distinct from
established domains. We contend that our search for intelligent machines has to
begin with the shape, rather than the place, of intelligence. Consequently, the
emerging field of critical AI studies should take methodological inspiration
from the history of science in its quest to conceptualize the contributions of
artificial intelligence to knowledge-making, within and beyond the domain-
specific sciences.
