Title: HLSFactory: A Framework Empowering High-Level Synthesis Datasets for
Machine Learning and Beyond
Authors: Stefan Abi-Karam, Rishov Sarkar, Allison Seigler, Sean Lowe, Zhigang
Wei, Hanqiu Chen, Nanditha Rao, Lizy John, Aman Arora, Cong Hao
ID: 2405.00820
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.00820

Abstract:
Machine learning (ML) techniques have been applied to high-level synthesis (HLS)
flows for quality-of-result (QoR) prediction and design space exploration (DSE).
Nevertheless, the scarcity of accessible high-quality HLS datasets and the
complexity of building such datasets present challenges. Existing datasets have
limitations in terms of benchmark coverage, design space enumeration, vendor
extensibility, or lack of reproducible and extensible software for dataset
construction. Many works also lack user-friendly ways to add more designs,
limiting wider adoption of such datasets. In response to these challenges, we
introduce HLSFactory, a comprehensive framework designed to facilitate the
curation and generation of high-quality HLS design datasets. HLSFactory has
three main stages: 1) a design space expansion stage to elaborate single HLS
designs into large design spaces using various optimization directives across
multiple vendor tools, 2) a design synthesis stage to execute HLS and FPGA tool
flows concurrently across designs, and 3) a data aggregation stage for
extracting standardized data into packaged datasets for ML usage. This
tripartite architecture ensures broad design space coverage via design space
expansion and supports multiple vendor tools. Users can contribute to each stage
with their own HLS designs and synthesis results and extend the framework itself
with custom frontends and tool flows. We also include an initial set of built-in
designs from common HLS benchmarks curated open-source HLS designs. We showcase
the versatility and multi-functionality of our framework through seven case
studies: I) ML model for QoR prediction; II) Design space sampling; III) Fine-
grained parallelism backend speedup; IV) Targeting Intel's HLS flow; V) Adding
new auxiliary designs; VI) Integrating published HLS data; VII) HLS tool version
regression benchmarking.
