Title: How Can I Improve? Using GPT to Highlight the Desired and Undesired Parts
of Open-ended Responses
Authors: Jionghao Lin, Eason Chen, Zeifei Han, Ashish Gurung, Danielle R.
Thomas, Wei Tan, Ngoc Dang Nguyen, Kenneth R. Koedinger
ID: 2405.00291
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.00291

Abstract:
Automated explanatory feedback systems play a crucial role in facilitating
learning for a large cohort of learners by offering feedback that incorporates
explanations, significantly enhancing the learning process. However, delivering
such explanatory feedback in real-time poses challenges, particularly when high
classification accuracy for domain-specific, nuanced responses is essential. Our
study leverages the capabilities of large language models, specifically
Generative Pre-Trained Transformers (GPT), to explore a sequence labeling
approach focused on identifying components of desired and less desired praise
for providing explanatory feedback within a tutor training dataset. Our aim is
to equip tutors with actionable, explanatory feedback during online training
lessons. To investigate the potential of GPT models for providing the
explanatory feedback, we employed two commonly-used approaches: prompting and
fine-tuning. To quantify the quality of highlighted praise components identified
by GPT models, we introduced a Modified Intersection over Union (M-IoU) score.
Our findings demonstrate that: (1) the M-IoU score effectively correlates with
human judgment in evaluating sequence quality; (2) using two-shot prompting on
GPT-3.5 resulted in decent performance in recognizing effort-based (M-IoU of
0.46) and outcome-based praise (M-IoU of 0.68); and (3) our optimally fine-tuned
GPT-3.5 model achieved M-IoU scores of 0.64 for effort-based praise and 0.84 for
outcome-based praise, aligning with the satisfaction levels evaluated by human
coders. Our results show promise for using GPT models to provide feedback that
focuses on specific elements in their open-ended responses that are desirable or
could use improvement.
