Title: Explainable Self-Organizing Artificial Intelligence Captures Landscape
Changes Correlated with Human Impact Data
Authors: John M. Wandeto, Birgitta Dresp-Langley
ID: 2405.09547
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.09547

Abstract:
Novel methods of analysis are needed to help advance our understanding of the
intricate interplay between landscape changes, population dynamics, and
sustainable development. Self organized machine learning has been highly
successful in the analysis of visual data the human expert eye may not be able
to see. Thus, subtle but significant changes in fine visual detail in images
relating to trending alterations in natural or urban landscapes may remain
undetected. In the course of time, such changes may be the cause or the
consequence of measurable human impact. Capturing such change in imaging data as
early as possible can make critical information readily available to citizens,
professionals and policymakers. This promotes change awareness, and facilitates
early decision making for action. Here, we use unsupervised Artificial
Intelligence (AI) that exploits principles of self-organized biological visual
learning for the analysis of imaging time series. The quantization error in the
output of a Self Organizing Map prototype is exploited as a computational metric
of variability and change. Given the proven sensitivity of this neural network
metric to the intensity and polarity of image pixel colour, it is shown to
capture critical changes in urban landscapes. This is achieved here on imaging
data for two regions of geographic interest in Las Vegas County, Nevada, USA.
The SOM analysis is combined with the statistical analysis of demographic data
revealing human impacts. These latter are significantly correlated with the
structural change trends in the numerical data for the specific regions of
interest. By correlating data relative to the impact of human activities with
numerical data indicating structural evolution, human footprint related
environmental changes can be predictably scaled.
