Title: Introducing the DREAMS Project: DaRk mattEr and Astrophysics with Machine
learning and Simulations
Authors: Jonah C. Rose, Paul Torrey, Francisco Villaescusa-Navarro, Mariangela
Lisanti, Tri Nguyen, Sandip Roy, Kassidy E. Kollmann, Mark Vogelsberger,
Francis-Yan Cyr-Racine, Mikhail V. Medvedev, Shy Genel, Daniel Anglés-Alcázar,
Nitya Kallivayalil, Bonny Y. Wang, Belén Costanza, Stephanie O'Neil, Cian Roche,
Soumyodipta Karmakar, Alex M. Garcia, Ryan Low, Shurui Lin, Olivia Mostow,
Akaxia Cruz, Andrea Caputo, Arya Farahi, Julian B. Muñoz, Lina Necib, Romain
Teyssier, Julianne J. Dalcanton, David Spergel
ID: 2405.00766
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.00766

Abstract:
We introduce the DREAMS project, an innovative approach to understanding the
astrophysical implications of alternative dark matter models and their effects
on galaxy formation and evolution. The DREAMS project will ultimately comprise
thousands of cosmological hydrodynamic simulations that simultaneously vary over
dark matter physics, astrophysics, and cosmology in modeling a range of systems
-- from galaxy clusters to ultra-faint satellites. Such extensive simulation
suites can provide adequate training sets for machine-learning-based analyses.
This paper introduces two new cosmological hydrodynamical suites of Warm Dark
Matter, each comprised of 1024 simulations generated using the Arepo code. One
suite consists of uniform-box simulations covering a $(25~h^{-1}~{\rm
M}_\odot)^3$ volume, while the other consists of Milky Way zoom-ins with
sufficient resolution to capture the properties of classical satellites. For
each simulation, the Warm Dark Matter particle mass is varied along with the
initial density field and several parameters controlling the strength of
baryonic feedback within the IllustrisTNG model. We provide two examples,
separately utilizing emulators and Convolutional Neural Networks, to demonstrate
how such simulation suites can be used to disentangle the effects of dark matter
and baryonic physics on galactic properties. The DREAMS project can be extended
further to include different dark matter models, galaxy formation physics, and
astrophysical targets. In this way, it will provide an unparalleled opportunity
to characterize uncertainties on predictions for small-scale observables,
leading to robust predictions for testing the particle physics nature of dark
matter on these scales.
