Title: Contribute to balance, wire in accordance: Emergence of backpropagation
from a simple, bio-plausible neuroplasticity rule
Authors: Xinhao Fan, Shreesh P Mysore
ID: 2405.14139
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14139

Abstract:
Backpropagation (BP) has been pivotal in advancing machine learning and remains
essential in computational applications and comparative studies of biological
and artificial neural networks. Despite its widespread use, the implementation
of BP in the brain remains elusive, and its biological plausibility is often
questioned due to inherent issues such as the need for symmetry of weights
between forward and backward connections, and the requirement of distinct
forward and backward phases of computation. Here, we introduce a novel
neuroplasticity rule that offers a potential mechanism for implementing BP in
the brain. Similar in general form to the classical Hebbian rule, this rule is
based on the core principles of maintaining the balance of excitatory and
inhibitory inputs as well as on retrograde signaling, and operates over three
progressively slower timescales: neural firing, retrograde signaling, and neural
plasticity. We hypothesize that each neuron possesses an internal state, termed
credit, in addition to its firing rate. After achieving equilibrium in firing
rates, neurons receive credits based on their contribution to the E-I balance of
postsynaptic neurons through retrograde signaling. As the network's credit
distribution stabilizes, connections from those presynaptic neurons are
strengthened that significantly contribute to the balance of postsynaptic
neurons. We demonstrate mathematically that our learning rule precisely
replicates BP in layered neural networks without any approximations. Simulations
on artificial neural networks reveal that this rule induces varying community
structures in networks, depending on the learning rate. This simple theoretical
framework presents a biologically plausible implementation of BP, with testable
assumptions and predictions that may be evaluated through biological
experiments.
