Title: Analyzing the impact of forecast errors in the planning of wine grape
harvesting operations using a multi-stage stochastic model approach
Authors: Alejandro Milani, Alejandro Mac Cawley
ID: 2405.19997
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.19997

Abstract:
Forecasts and future beliefs play a critical role in the harvest labor hiring
planning, especially when errors in them entails fixing previous made decisions,
which can carry extra costs or losses. In this article, we study the effect that
errors in the forecast/belief can have in the wine grape harvest planning
process and the losses of the product. Errors are reflected in the prediction of
yields and in the estimation of rain transition probabilities have on the value
and losses of product. Also, using a multi-stage stochastic optimization model
we can study the effect that second stage decisions have on the ability fix the
planning decisions, reduce product losses and generate value. In a first step,
we develop a multi-stage stochastic model which considers grape growth
uncertainty given a belief in future events. The model decisions variables are:
hiring, firing and maintaining harvest labor through periods, and also the
harvested quantities in each period and block. Once the model defines the plan
for the coming epoch, some decisions are implemented and a deviation in the
forecast is revealed and the decision maker can adjust future decisions and
beliefs. Results indicate that the effect of the errors in yield determination
is not symmetrical; underestimations of the yields have a more significant
negative effect on the objective function, while overestimation does not.
Flexibility to revise hiring decisions does not make a significant difference if
the yields are overestimated. The model significantly reduces losses of the
better-quality grapes, since they correspond to a significant proportion of the
income and account for the largest portion of income loss. Last, grapes that
have an early improvement of their quality give the decision-maker an extra
level of flexibility to adjust the harvesting plan.
