Title: Should we necessarily treat masses as localized when analysing tests of
quantum gravity?
Authors: Adrian Kent
ID: 2405.20514
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.20514

Abstract:
Recently proposed ``table-top tests of quantum gravity'' involve creating,
separating and recombining superpositions of masses at non-relativistic speeds.
The general expectation is that these generate superpositions of gravitational
fields via the Newtonian potential. Analyses suggest that negligible
gravitational radiation is generated if the interference experiments involve
sufficiently small accelerations. One way of thinking about this is that matter
and the static gravitational field are temporarily entangled and then
disentangled. Another is that the static gravitational field degrees of freedom
are dependent on the matter and do not belong to a separate Hilbert space, and
that there is always negligible entanglement between matter and dynamical
gravitational degrees of freedom.
  In this last picture, localized masses effectively become infinitely extended
objects, inseparable from their Newtonian potentials. While this picture seems
hard to extend to a fully relativistic theory of non-quantum gravity, it has
significant implications for analyses of how or whether BMV and other non-
relativistic experiments might test the quantum nature of gravity. If the masses
in a BMV experiment are regarded as occupying overlapping regions (or indeed all
of space), explaining how they become entangled does not require that their
gravitational interaction involves quantum information exchange. On this view,
while the experiments test gravity in a regime where quantum theory describes
all relevant matter degrees of freedom, they do not necessarily test its quantum
nature. It might be argued that no plausible explanation other than quantum
gravity could be consistent both with these experiments and with relativity. But
this relies on further theoretical assumptions and is weaker than claiming
direct evidence for quantum gravitational interactions from the experiments
alone.
