Title: Review of Deep Representation Learning Techniques for Brain-Computer
Interfaces and Recommendations
Authors: Pierre Guetschel, Sara Ahmadi, Michael Tangermann
ID: 2405.19345
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.19345

Abstract:
In the field of brain-computer interfaces (BCIs), the potential for leveraging
deep learning techniques for representing electroencephalogram (EEG) signals has
gained substantial interest. This review synthesizes empirical findings from a
collection of articles using deep representation learning techniques for BCI
decoding, to provide a comprehensive analysis of the current state-of-the-art.
Each article was scrutinized based on three criteria: (1) the deep
representation learning technique employed, (2) the underlying motivation for
its utilization, and (3) the approaches adopted for characterizing the learned
representations. Among the 81 articles finally reviewed in depth, our analysis
reveals a predominance of 31 articles using autoencoders. We identified 13
studies employing self-supervised learning (SSL) techniques, among which ten
were published in 2022 or later, attesting to the relative youth of the field.
However, at the time being, none of these have led to standard foundation models
that are picked up by the BCI community. Likewise, only a few studies have
introspected their learned representations. We observed that the motivation in
most studies for using representation learning techniques is for solving
transfer learning tasks, but we also found more specific motivations such as to
learn robustness or invariances, as an algorithmic bridge, or finally to uncover
the structure of the data. Given the potential of foundation models to
effectively tackle these challenges, we advocate for a continued dedication to
the advancement of foundation models specifically designed for EEG signal
decoding by using SSL techniques. We also underline the imperative of
establishing specialized benchmarks and datasets to facilitate the development
and continuous improvement of such foundation models.
