Title: Participation in the age of foundation models
Authors: Harini Suresh, Emily Tseng, Meg Young, Mary L. Gray, Emma Pierson,
Karen Levy
ID: 2405.19479
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.19479

Abstract:
Growing interest and investment in the capabilities of foundation models has
positioned such systems to impact a wide array of public services. Alongside
these opportunities is the risk that these systems reify existing power
imbalances and cause disproportionate harm to marginalized communities.
Participatory approaches hold promise to instead lend agency and decision-making
power to marginalized stakeholders. But existing approaches in participatory
AI/ML are typically deeply grounded in context - how do we apply these
approaches to foundation models, which are, by design, disconnected from
context? Our paper interrogates this question.
  First, we examine existing attempts at incorporating participation into
foundation models. We highlight the tension between participation and scale,
demonstrating that it is intractable for impacted communities to meaningfully
shape a foundation model that is intended to be universally applicable. In
response, we develop a blueprint for participatory foundation models that
identifies more local, application-oriented opportunities for meaningful
participation. In addition to the "foundation" layer, our framework proposes the
"subfloor'' layer, in which stakeholders develop shared technical
infrastructure, norms and governance for a grounded domain, and the "surface''
layer, in which affected communities shape the use of a foundation model for a
specific downstream task. The intermediate "subfloor'' layer scopes the range of
potential harms to consider, and affords communities more concrete avenues for
deliberation and intervention. At the same time, it avoids duplicative effort by
scaling input across relevant use cases. Through three case studies in clinical
care, financial services, and journalism, we illustrate how this multi-layer
model can create more meaningful opportunities for participation than solely
intervening at the foundation layer.
