Title: Challenging the Machine: Contestability in Government AI Systems
Authors: Susan Landau, James X. Dempsey, Ece Kamar, Steven M. Bellovin, Robert
Pool
ID: 2406.10430
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.10430

Abstract:
In an October 2023 executive order (EO), President Biden issued a detailed but
largely aspirational road map for the safe and responsible development and use
of artificial intelligence (AI). The challenge for the January 24-25, 2024
workshop was to transform those aspirations regarding one specific but crucial
issue -- the ability of individuals to challenge government decisions made about
themselves -- into actionable guidance enabling agencies to develop, procure,
and use genuinely contestable advanced automated decision-making systems. While
the Administration has taken important steps since the October 2023 EO, the
insights garnered from our workshop remain highly relevant, as the requirements
for contestability of advanced decision-making systems are not yet fully defined
or implemented.
  The workshop brought together technologists, members of government agencies
and civil society organizations, litigators, and researchers in an intensive
two-day meeting that examined the challenges that users, developers, and
agencies faced in enabling contestability in light of advanced automated
decision-making systems. To ensure a free and open flow of discussion, the
meeting was held under a modified version of the Chatham House rule.
Participants were free to use any information or details that they learned, but
they may not attribute any remarks made at the meeting by the identity or the
affiliation of the speaker. Thus, the workshop summary that follows anonymizes
speakers and their affiliation. Where an identification of an agency, company,
or organization is made, it is done from a public, identified resource and does
not necessarily reflect statements made by participants at the workshop.
  This document is a report of that workshop, along with recommendations and
explanatory material.
