Title: Towards Precision Photometric Type Ia Supernova Cosmology with Machine
Learning
Authors: Helen Qu
ID: 2406.04529
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.04529

Abstract:
The revolutionary discovery of dark energy and accelerating cosmic expansion was
made with just 42 type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) in 1999. Since then, large
synoptic surveys, e.g., Dark Energy Survey (DES), have observed thousands more
SNe Ia and the upcoming Rubin Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST) and Roman
Space Telescope promise to deliver millions in the next decade. This
unprecedented data volume can be used to test concordance cosmology. However,
extracting a pure SN Ia sample with accurate redshifts for such a large dataset
will be a challenge. Spectroscopic classification will not be possible for the
vast majority of discovered objects, and only 25% will have spectroscopic
redshifts. This thesis presents a series of observational and methodological
studies designed to address the questions associated with this new era of
photometric SN Ia cosmology. First, we present a machine learning (ML) method
for SN photometric classification, SCONE. Photometric classification enables SNe
with no spectroscopic information to be categorized, a critical step for
cosmological analysis. SCONE achieves 99+% accuracy distinguishing simulated SNe
Ia from non-Ia SNe, and is a part of DES, LSST, and Roman analysis pipelines. We
also show that SCONE can classify 6 SN types with 75% accuracy on the night of
initial discovery, comparable to results in the literature for full-phase SNe.
Next, we study current methods for estimating SN Ia redshifts and propose an ML
alternative that uses SN photometry alone to extract redshift information.
Photo-zSNthesis is a host galaxy-independent redshift estimator accurate to
within 2% across the redshift range of LSST, a first in the literature. Finally,
we focus on ML robustness and demonstrate a general method for improving
robustness that achieves new state-of-the-art results on astronomical object
classification, wildlife identification, and tumor detection.
