Title: Compliance Cards: Automated EU AI Act Compliance Analyses amidst a
Complex AI Supply Chain
Authors: Bill Marino, Yaqub Chaudhary, Yulu Pi, Rui-Jie Yew, Preslav
Aleksandrov, Carwyn Rahman, William F. Shen, Isaac Robinson, Nicholas D. Lane
ID: 2406.14758
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.14758

Abstract:
As the AI supply chain grows more complex, AI systems and models are
increasingly likely to incorporate multiple internally- or externally-sourced
components such as datasets and (pre-trained) models. In such cases, determining
whether or not the aggregate AI system or model complies with the EU AI Act
(AIA) requires a multi-step process in which compliance-related information
about both the AI system or model and all its component parts is: (1) gathered,
potentially from multiple arms-length sources; (2) harmonized, if necessary; (3)
inputted into an analysis that looks across all of it to render a compliance
prediction. Because this process is so complex and time-consuming, it threatens
to overburden the limited compliance resources of the AI providers (i.e.,
developers) who bear much of the responsibility for complying with the AIA. It
also renders rapid or real-time compliance analyses infeasible in many AI
development scenarios where they would be beneficial to providers. To address
these shortcomings, we introduce a complete system for automating provider-side
AIA compliance analyses amidst a complex AI supply chain. This system has two
key elements. First is an interlocking set of computational, multi-stakeholder
transparency artifacts that capture AIA-specific metadata about both: (1) the
provider's overall AI system or model; and (2) the datasets and pre-trained
models it incorporates as components. Second is an algorithm that operates
across all those artifacts to render a real-time prediction about whether or not
the aggregate AI system or model complies with the AIA. All told, this system
promises to dramatically facilitate and democratize provider-side AIA compliance
analyses (and, perhaps by extension, provider-side AIA compliance).
