Title: Affirmative safety: An approach to risk management for high-risk AI
Authors: Akash R. Wasil, Joshua Clymer, David Krueger, Emily Dardaman, Simeon
Campos, Evan R. Murphy
ID: 2406.15371
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.15371

Abstract:
Prominent AI experts have suggested that companies developing high-risk AI
systems should be required to show that such systems are safe before they can be
developed or deployed. The goal of this paper is to expand on this idea and
explore its implications for risk management. We argue that entities developing
or deploying high-risk AI systems should be required to present evidence of
affirmative safety: a proactive case that their activities keep risks below
acceptable thresholds. We begin the paper by highlighting global security risks
from AI that have been acknowledged by AI experts and world governments. Next,
we briefly describe principles of risk management from other high-risk fields
(e.g., nuclear safety). Then, we propose a risk management approach for advanced
AI in which model developers must provide evidence that their activities keep
certain risks below regulator-set thresholds. As a first step toward
understanding what affirmative safety cases should include, we illustrate how
certain kinds of technical evidence and operational evidence can support an
affirmative safety case. In the technical section, we discuss behavioral
evidence (evidence about model outputs), cognitive evidence (evidence about
model internals), and developmental evidence (evidence about the training
process). In the operational section, we offer examples of organizational
practices that could contribute to affirmative safety cases: information
security practices, safety culture, and emergency response capacity. Finally, we
briefly compare our approach to the NIST AI Risk Management Framework. Overall,
we hope our work contributes to ongoing discussions about national and global
security risks posed by AI and regulatory approaches to address these risks.
