Title: AD-H: Autonomous Driving with Hierarchical Agents
Authors: Zaibin Zhang, Shiyu Tang, Yuanhang Zhang, Talas Fu, Yifan Wang, Yang
Liu, Dong Wang, Jing Shao, Lijun Wang, Huchuan Lu
ID: 2406.03474
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.03474

Abstract:
Due to the impressive capabilities of multimodal large language models (MLLMs),
recent works have focused on employing MLLM-based agents for autonomous driving
in large-scale and dynamic environments. However, prevalent approaches often
directly translate high-level instructions into low-level vehicle control
signals, which deviates from the inherent language generation paradigm of MLLMs
and fails to fully harness their emergent powers. As a result, the
generalizability of these methods is highly restricted by autonomous driving
datasets used during fine-tuning. To tackle this challenge, we propose to
connect high-level instructions and low-level control signals with mid-level
language-driven commands, which are more fine-grained than high-level
instructions but more universal and explainable than control signals, and thus
can effectively bridge the gap in between. We implement this idea through a
hierarchical multi-agent driving system named AD-H, including a MLLM planner for
high-level reasoning and a lightweight controller for low-level execution. The
hierarchical design liberates the MLLM from low-level control signal decoding
and therefore fully releases their emergent capability in high-level perception,
reasoning, and planning. We build a new dataset with action hierarchy
annotations. Comprehensive closed-loop evaluations demonstrate several key
advantages of our proposed AD-H system. First, AD-H can notably outperform
state-of-the-art methods in achieving exceptional driving performance, even
exhibiting self-correction capabilities during vehicle operation, a scenario not
encountered in the training dataset. Second, AD-H demonstrates superior
generalization under long-horizon instructions and novel environmental
conditions, significantly surpassing current state-of-the-art methods. We will
make our data and code publicly accessible at
https://github.com/zhangzaibin/AD-H
