Title: Generative artificial intelligence in ophthalmology: multimodal retinal
images for the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease with convolutional neural
networks
Authors: I. R. Slootweg, M. Thach, K. R. Curro-Tafili, F. D. Verbraak, F. H.
Bouwman, Y. A. L. Pijnenburg, J. F. Boer, J. H. P. de Kwisthout, L. Bagheriye,
P. J. González
ID: 2406.18247
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.18247

Abstract:
Background/Aim. This study aims to predict Amyloid Positron Emission Tomography
(AmyloidPET) status with multimodal retinal imaging and convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) and to improve the performance through pretraining with
synthetic data. Methods. Fundus autofluorescence, optical coherence tomography
(OCT), and OCT angiography images from 328 eyes of 59 AmyloidPET positive
subjects and 108 AmyloidPET negative subjects were used for classification.
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) were trained to generate
synthetic images and unimodal CNNs were pretrained on synthetic data and
finetuned on real data or trained solely on real data. Multimodal classifiers
were developed to combine predictions of the four unimodal CNNs with patient
metadata. Class activation maps of the unimodal classifiers provided insight
into the network's attention to inputs. Results. DDPMs generated diverse,
realistic images without memorization. Pretraining unimodal CNNs with synthetic
data improved AUPR at most from 0.350 to 0.579. Integration of metadata in
multimodal CNNs improved AUPR from 0.486 to 0.634, which was the best overall
best classifier. Class activation maps highlighted relevant retinal regions
which correlated with AD. Conclusion. Our method for generating and leveraging
synthetic data has the potential to improve AmyloidPET prediction from
multimodal retinal imaging. A DDPM can generate realistic and unique multimodal
synthetic retinal images. Our best performing unimodal and multimodal
classifiers were not pretrained on synthetic data, however pretraining with
synthetic data slightly improved classification performance for two out of the
four modalities.
