Title: Hardware Realization of Neuromorphic Computing with a 4-Port Photonic
Reservoir for Modulation Format Identification
Authors: Enes Şeker, Rijil Thomas, Guillermo von Hünefeld, Stephan Suckow, Mahdi
Kaveh, Gregor Ronniger, Pooyan Safari, Isaac Sackey, David Stahl, Colja
Schubert, Johannes Karl Fischer, Ronald Freund, Max C. Lemme
ID: 2406.13549
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.13549

Abstract:
The fields of machine learning and artificial intelligence drive researchers to
explore energy-efficient, brain-inspired new hardware. Reservoir computing
encompasses recurrent neural networks for sequential data processing and matches
the performance of other recurrent networks with less training and lower costs.
However, traditional software-based neural networks suffer from high energy
consumption due to computational demands and massive data transfer needs.
Photonic reservoir computing overcomes this challenge with energy-efficient
neuromorphic photonic integrated circuits or NeuroPICs. Here, we introduce a
reservoir NeuroPIC used for modulation format identification in C-band
telecommunication network monitoring. It is built on a silicon-on-insulator
platform with a 4-port reservoir architecture consisting of a set of physical
nodes connected via delay lines. We comprehensively describe the NeuroPIC design
and fabrication, experimentally demonstrate its performance, and compare it with
simulations. The NeuroPIC incorporates non-linearity through a simple digital
readout and achieves close to 100% accuracy in identifying several
configurations of quadrature amplitude modulation formats transmitted over 20 km
of optical fiber at 32 GBaud symbol rate. The NeuroPIC performance is robust
against fabrication imperfections like waveguide propagation loss, phase
randomization, etc. and delay line length variations. Furthermore, the
experimental results exceeded numerical simulations, which we attribute to
enhanced signal interference in the experimental NeuroPIC output. Our energy-
efficient photonic approach has the potential for high-speed temporal data
processing in a variety of applications.
