Title: Bit by Bit: Gravity Through the Lens of Quantum Information
Authors: William Munizzi
ID: 2406.01695
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.01695

Abstract:
This dissertation reviews several recent advances at the intersection of quantum
information and holography. In holography, properties of quantum systems admit a
gravitational interpretation via the AdS/CFT correspondence. For holographic
states, boundary entanglement entropy is dual to bulk geodesic areas, known as
Ryu-Takayanagi surfaces. Furthermore, the viability to possess a holographic
dual at all is constrained by entanglement structure. Accordingly, entanglement
enables a coarse classification of states in a Hilbert space. Similarly, state
transformation under operator groups also provides a classification on the
Hilbert space. Stabilizer states, for example, are invariant under large sets of
operations and consequently can be simulated on a classical computer. Cayley
graphs offer a useful representation for a group of operators, where vertices
represent group elements and edges represent generators. The orbit of a state
under action of the group can also be represented as a "reachability graph", a
quotient of the group Cayley graph. Reachability graphs can be dressed to encode
entanglement information, making them a useful tool for studying entanglement
dynamics. Quotienting a reachability graph by group elements that fix a state
computable, e.g. entanglement entropy, builds a "contracted graph". Contracted
graphs explicitly bound state parameter evolution in quantum circuits. In this
thesis, an upper bound on entanglement entropy evolution in Clifford circuits is
presented. Another important property of quantum systems is magic, which
quantifies the difficulty of simulating a quantum state. Magic and entanglement
play complementary roles when describing emergent phenomena in AdS/CFT. This
work describes the interplay of entanglement and magic, offering holographic
consequences for magic as cosmic brane back-reaction.
