Title: Efficient Massive Black Hole Binary parameter estimation for LISA using
Sequential Neural Likelihood
Authors: Iván Martín Vílchez, Carlos F. Sopuerta
ID: 2406.00565
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.00565

Abstract:
The inspiral, merger, and ringdown of Massive Black Hole Binaries (MBHBs) is one
the main sources of Gravitational Waves (GWs) for the future Laser
Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA), an ESA-led mission in the implementation
phase. It is expected that LISA will detect these systems throughout the entire
observable universe. Robust and efficient data analysis algorithms are necessary
to detect and estimate physical parameters for these systems. In this work, we
explore the application of Sequential Neural Likelihood, a simulation-based
inference algorithm, to detect and characterize MBHB GW signals in synthetic
LISA data. We describe in detail the different elements of the method, their
performance and possible alternatives that can be used to enhance the
performance. Instead of sampling from the conventional likelihood function,
which requires a forward simulation for each evaluation, this method constructs
a surrogate likelihood that is ultimately described by a neural network trained
from a dataset of simulations of the MBHB signals and noise. One important
advantage of this method is that, given that the likelihood is independent of
the priors, we can iteratively train models that target specific observations in
a fraction of the time and computational cost that other traditional and machine
learning-based strategies would require. Because of the iterative nature of the
method, we are able to train models to obtain qualitatively similar posteriors
with less than 2\% of the simulator calls that Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods
would require. We compare these posteriors with those obtained from Markov Chain
Monte Carlo techniques and discuss the differences that appear, in particular in
relation with the important role that data compression has in the modular
implementation of the method that we present. We also discuss different
strategies to improve the performance of the algorithms.
