Title: Benchmarking End-To-End Performance of AI-Based Chip Placement Algorithms
Authors: Zhihai Wang, Zijie Geng, Zhaojie Tu, Jie Wang, Yuxi Qian, Zhexuan Xu,
Ziyan Liu, Siyuan Xu, Zhentao Tang, Shixiong Kai, Mingxuan Yuan, Jianye Hao, Bin
Li, Yongdong Zhang, Feng Wu
ID: 2407.15026
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.15026

Abstract:
The increasing complexity of modern very-large-scale integration (VLSI) design
highlights the significance of Electronic Design Automation (EDA) technologies.
Chip placement is a critical step in the EDA workflow, which positions chip
modules on the canvas with the goal of optimizing performance, power, and area
(PPA) metrics of final chip designs. Recent advances have demonstrated the great
potential of AI-based algorithms in enhancing chip placement. However, due to
the lengthy workflow of chip design, the evaluations of these algorithms often
focus on intermediate surrogate metrics, which are easy to compute but
frequently reveal a substantial misalignment with the end-to-end performance
(i.e., the final design PPA). To address this challenge, we introduce ChiPBench,
which can effectively facilitate research in chip placement within the AI
community. ChiPBench is a comprehensive benchmark specifically designed to
evaluate the effectiveness of existing AI-based chip placement algorithms in
improving final design PPA metrics. Specifically, we have gathered 20 circuits
from various domains (e.g., CPU, GPU, and microcontrollers). These designs are
compiled by executing the workflow from the verilog source code, which preserves
necessary physical implementation kits, enabling evaluations for the placement
algorithms on their impacts on the final design PPA. We executed six state-of-
the-art AI-based chip placement algorithms on these designs and plugged the
results of each single-point algorithm into the physical implementation workflow
to obtain the final PPA results. Experimental results show that even if
intermediate metric of a single-point algorithm is dominant, while the final PPA
results are unsatisfactory. We believe that our benchmark will serve as an
effective evaluation framework to bridge the gap between academia and industry.
