Title: Visions of a Discipline: Analyzing Introductory AI Courses on YouTube
Authors: Severin Engelmann, Madiha Zahrah Choksi, Angelina Wang, Casey Fiesler
ID: 2407.13077
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.13077

Abstract:
Education plays an indispensable role in fostering societal well-being and is
widely regarded as one of the most influential factors in shaping the future of
generations to come. As artificial intelligence (AI) becomes more deeply
integrated into our daily lives and the workforce, educational institutions at
all levels are directing their focus on resources that cater to AI education.
Our work investigates the current landscape of introductory AI courses on
YouTube, and the potential for introducing ethics in this context. We
qualitatively analyze the 20 most watched introductory AI courses on YouTube,
coding a total of 92.2 hours of educational content viewed by close to 50
million people. Introductory AI courses do not meaningfully engage with ethical
or societal challenges of AI (RQ1). When \textit{defining and framing AI},
introductory AI courses foreground excitement around AI's transformative role in
society, over-exaggerate AI's current and future abilities, and anthropomorphize
AI (RQ2). In \textit{teaching AI}, we see a widespread reliance on corporate AI
tools and frameworks as well as a prioritization on a hands-on approach to
learning rather than on conceptual foundations (RQ3). In promoting key
\textit{AI practices}, introductory AI courses abstract away entirely the socio-
technical nature of AI classification and prediction, for example by favoring
data quantity over data quality (RQ4). We extend our analysis with
recommendations that aim to integrate ethical reflections into introductory AI
courses. We recommend that introductory AI courses should (1) highlight ethical
challenges of AI to present a more balanced perspective, (2) raise ethical
issues explicitly relevant to the technical concepts discussed and (3) nurture a
sense of accountability in future AI developers.
