Title: A Multi-view Mask Contrastive Learning Graph Convolutional Neural Network
for Age Estimation
Authors: Yiping Zhang, Yuntao Shou, Tao Meng, Wei Ai, Keqin Li
ID: 2407.16234
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.16234

Abstract:
The age estimation task aims to use facial features to predict the age of people
and is widely used in public security, marketing, identification, and other
fields. However, the features are mainly concentrated in facial keypoints, and
existing CNN and Transformer-based methods have inflexibility and redundancy for
modeling complex irregular structures. Therefore, this paper proposes a Multi-
view Mask Contrastive Learning Graph Convolutional Neural Network (MMCL-GCN) for
age estimation. Specifically, the overall structure of the MMCL-GCN network
contains a feature extraction stage and an age estimation stage. In the feature
extraction stage, we introduce a graph structure to construct face images as
input and then design a Multi-view Mask Contrastive Learning (MMCL) mechanism to
learn complex structural and semantic information about face images. The
learning mechanism employs an asymmetric siamese network architecture, which
utilizes an online encoder-decoder structure to reconstruct the missing
information from the original graph and utilizes the target encoder to learn
latent representations for contrastive learning. Furthermore, to promote the two
learning mechanisms better compatible and complementary, we adopt two
augmentation strategies and optimize the joint losses. In the age estimation
stage, we design a Multi-layer Extreme Learning Machine (ML-IELM) with identity
mapping to fully use the features extracted by the online encoder. Then, a
classifier and a regressor were constructed based on ML-IELM, which were used to
identify the age grouping interval and accurately estimate the final age.
Extensive experiments show that MMCL-GCN can effectively reduce the error of age
estimation on benchmark datasets such as Adience, MORPH-II, and LAP-2016.
