Title: X-ray Emission of Nearby Low-mass and Sun-like Stars with Directly
Imageable Habitable Zones
Authors: Breanna A. Binder, Sarah Peacock, Edward W. Schwieterman, Margaret C.
Turnbull, Azariel Y. Virgen, Stephen R. Kane, Alison Farrish, Katherine Garcia-
Sage
ID: 2407.21247
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21247

Abstract:
Stellar X-ray and UV radiation can significantly affect the survival,
composition, and long-term evolution of the atmospheres of planets in or near
their host star's habitable zone (HZ). Especially interesting are planetary
systems in the solar neighborhood that may host temperate and potentially
habitable surface conditions, which may be analyzed by future ground and space-
based direct-imaging surveys for signatures of habitability and life. To advance
our understanding of the radiation environment in these systems, we leverage
$\sim$3 Msec of XMM-Newton and Chandra observations in order to measure three
fundamental stellar properties at X-ray energies for 57 nearby FGKM stellar
systems: the shape of the stellar X-ray spectrum, the luminosity, and the
timescales over which the stars vary (e.g., due to flares). These systems
possess HZs that will be directly imageable to next-generation telescopes such
as the Habitable Worlds Observatory and ground-based Extremely Large Telescopes
(ELTs). We identify 29 stellar systems with $L_X/L_{\rm bol}$ ratios similar to
(or less than) that of the Sun; any potential planets in the habitable zones of
these stars therefore reside in present day X-ray radiation environments similar
to (or less hostile than) modern Earth, though a broader set of these targets
could host habitable planets. An additional 19 stellar systems have been
observed with the Swift X-ray Telescope; in total, only $\sim$30% of potential
direct imaging target stars has been observed with XMM-Newton, Chandra, or
Swift. The data products from this work (X-ray light curves and spectra) are
available via a public Zenodo repository (doi: 10.5281/zenodo.11490574).
