Title: In the Shadow of Smith`s Invisible Hand: Risks to Economic Stability and
Social Wellbeing in the Age of Intelligence
Authors: Jo-An Occhipinti, William Hynes, Ante Prodan, Harris A. Eyre, Roy
Green, Sharan Burrow, Marcel Tanner, John Buchanan, Goran Ujdur, Frederic
Destrebecq, Christine Song, Steven Carnevale, Ian B. Hickie, Mark Heffernan
ID: 2407.01545
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.01545

Abstract:
Work is fundamental to societal prosperity and mental health, providing
financial security, identity, purpose, and social integration. The emergence of
generative artificial intelligence (AI) has catalysed debate on job
displacement. Some argue that many new jobs and industries will emerge to offset
the displacement, while others foresee a widespread decoupling of economic
productivity from human input threatening jobs on an unprecedented scale. This
study explores the conditions under which both may be true and examines the
potential for a self-reinforcing cycle of recessionary pressures that would
necessitate sustained government intervention to maintain job security and
economic stability. A system dynamics model was developed to undertake ex ante
analysis of the effect of AI-capital deepening on labour underutilisation and
demand in the economy. Results indicate that even a moderate increase in the AI-
capital-to-labour ratio could increase labour underutilisation to double its
current level, decrease per capita disposable income by 26% (95% interval, 20.6%
- 31.8%), and decrease the consumption index by 21% (95% interval, 13.6% -
28.3%) by mid-2050. To prevent a reduction in per capita disposable income due
to the estimated increase in underutilization, at least a 10.8-fold increase in
the new job creation rate would be necessary. Results demonstrate the
feasibility of an AI-capital- to-labour ratio threshold beyond which even high
rates of new job creation cannot prevent declines in consumption. The precise
threshold will vary across economies, emphasizing the urgent need for empirical
research tailored to specific contexts. This study underscores the need for
governments, civic organisations, and business to work together to ensure a
smooth transition to an AI- dominated economy to safeguard the Mental Wealth of
nations.
