Title: Multi-task Photonic Reservoir Computing: Wavelength Division Multiplexing
for Parallel Computing with a Silicon Microring Resonator
Authors: Bernard J. Giron Castro, Christophe Peucheret, Darko Zibar, Francesco
Da Ros
ID: 2407.21189
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21189

Abstract:
Nowadays, as the ever-increasing demand for more powerful computing resources
continues, alternative advanced computing paradigms are under extensive
investigation. Significant effort has been made to deviate from conventional Von
Neumann architectures. In-memory computing has emerged in the field of
electronics as a possible solution to the infamous bottleneck between memory and
computing processors, which reduces the effective throughput of data. In
photonics, novel schemes attempt to collocate the computing processor and memory
in a single device. Photonics offers the flexibility of multiplexing streams of
data not only spatially and in time, but also in frequency or, equivalently, in
wavelength, which makes it highly suitable for parallel computing. Here, we
numerically show the use of time and wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) to
solve four independent tasks at the same time in a single photonic chip, serving
as a proof of concept for our proposal. The system is a time-delay reservoir
computing (TDRC) based on a microring resonator (MRR). The addressed tasks cover
different applications: Time-series prediction, waveform signal classification,
wireless channel equalization, and radar signal prediction. The system is also
tested for simultaneous computing of up to 10 instances of the same task,
exhibiting excellent performance. The footprint of the system is reduced by
using time-division multiplexing of the nodes that act as the neurons of the
studied neural network scheme. WDM is used for the parallelization of wavelength
channels, each addressing a single task. By adjusting the input power and
frequency of each optical channel, we can achieve levels of performance for each
of the tasks that are comparable to those quoted in state-of-the-art reports
focusing on single-task operation...
