Title: Machine-assisted classification of potential biosignatures in earth-like
exoplanets using low signal-to-noise ratio transmission spectra
Authors: David S. Duque-Castaño, Jorge I. Zuluaga, Lauren Flor-Torres
ID: 2407.19167
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.19167

Abstract:
The search for atmospheric biosignatures in Earth-like exoplanets is one of the
most pressing challenges in observational astrobiology. Detecting biogenic gases
in terrestrial planets requires high-resolution observations and long
integration times. In this work, we developed and tested a general machine-
learning methodology designed to classify transmission spectra with low Signal-
to-Noise Ratio (SNR) according to their potential to contain biosignatures or
bioindicators. To achieve this, we trained a set of models capable of
classifying noisy transmission spectra (including stellar contamination) as
containing methane, ozone, and/or water (multilabel classification), or simply
as being interesting for follow-up observations (binary classification). The
models were trained using $\sim10^7$ synthetic spectra of planets similar to
TRAPPIST-1 e, generated with the package MultiREx. The trained algorithms
correctly classified most of the test planets with transmission spectra having
an SNR as low as 4, containing methane and/or ozone at mixing ratios similar to
those of modern and Proterozoic Earth. Tests on realistic synthetic spectra,
based on the current Earth's atmosphere, indicate that some of our models would
classify most inhabited terrestrial planets observed with JWST/NIRSpec PRISM
around M-dwarfs at distances similar to or smaller than that of TRAPPIST-1 e as
likely to contain bioindicators, using 4 to 10 transits. These results have
significant implications for the design of observing programs and future
campaigns. Machine-assisted strategies, such as the one presented here, could
greatly optimize the use of JWST resources for biosignature and bioindicator
searches, while maximizing the chances of a real discovery through dedicated
follow-up observations of promising candidates.
