Title: New Gravitational Wave Discoveries Enabled by Machine Learning
Authors: Alexandra E. Koloniari, Evdokia C. Koursoumpa, Paraskevi Nousi,
Paraskevas Lampropoulos, Nikolaos Passalis, Anastasios Tefas, Nikolaos
Stergioulas
ID: 2407.07820
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.07820

Abstract:
The detection of gravitational waves has revolutionized our understanding of the
universe, offering unprecedented insights into its dynamics. A major goal of
gravitational wave data analysis is to speed up the detection and parameter
estimation process using machine learning techniques, in light of an anticipated
surge in detected events that would render traditional methods impractical.
Here, we present the first detections of new gravitational-wave candidate events
in data from a network of interferometric detectors enabled by machine learning.
We discuss several new enhancements of our ResNet-based deep learning code,
AresGW, that increased its sensitivity, including a new hierarchical
classification of triggers, based on different noise and frequency filters. The
enhancements resulted in a significant reduction in the false alarm rate,
allowing AresGW to surpass traditional pipelines in the number of detected
events in its effective training range (single source masses between 7 and 50
solar masses and source chirp masses between 10 and 40 solar masses), when the
new detections are included. We calculate the astrophysical significance of
events detected with AresGW using a logarithmic ranking statistic and injections
into O3 data. Furthermore, we present spectrograms, parameter estimation, and
reconstruction in the time domain for our new candidate events and discuss the
distribution of their properties. In addition, the AresGW code exhibited very
good performance when tested across various two-detector setups and on
observational data from the O1 and O2 observing periods. Our findings underscore
the remarkable potential of AresGW as a fast and sensitive detection algorithm
for gravitational-wave astronomy, paving the way for a larger number of future
discoveries.
