Title: Robotic Control via Embodied Chain-of-Thought Reasoning
Authors: Michał Zawalski, William Chen, Karl Pertsch, Oier Mees, Chelsea Finn,
Sergey Levine
ID: 2407.08693
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.08693

Abstract:
A key limitation of learned robot control policies is their inability to
generalize outside their training data. Recent works on vision-language-action
models (VLAs) have shown that the use of large, internet pre-trained vision-
language models as the backbone of learned robot policies can substantially
improve their robustness and generalization ability. Yet, one of the most
exciting capabilities of large vision-language models in other domains is their
ability to reason iteratively through complex problems. Can that same capability
be brought into robotics to allow policies to improve performance by reasoning
about a given task before acting? Naive use of "chain-of-thought" (CoT) style
prompting is significantly less effective with standard VLAs because of the
relatively simple training examples that are available to them. Additionally,
purely semantic reasoning about sub-tasks, as is common in regular CoT, is
insufficient for robot policies that need to ground their reasoning in sensory
observations and the robot state. To this end, we introduce Embodied Chain-of-
Thought Reasoning (ECoT) for VLAs, in which we train VLAs to perform multiple
steps of reasoning about plans, sub-tasks, motions, and visually grounded
features like object bounding boxes and end effector positions, before
predicting the robot action. We design a scalable pipeline for generating
synthetic training data for ECoT on large robot datasets. We demonstrate, that
ECoT increases the absolute success rate of OpenVLA, the current strongest open-
source VLA policy, by 28% across challenging generalization tasks, without any
additional robot training data. Additionally, ECoT makes it easier for humans to
interpret a policy's failures and correct its behavior using natural language.
