Title: Neuromorphic Imaging with Super-Resolution
Authors: Pei Zhang, Shuo Zhu, Chutian Wang, Yaping Zhao, Edmund Y. Lam
ID: 2407.05764
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.05764

Abstract:
Neuromorphic imaging is an emerging technique that imitates the human retina to
sense variations in dynamic scenes. It responds to pixel-level brightness
changes by asynchronous streaming events and boasts microsecond temporal
precision over a high dynamic range, yielding blur-free recordings under extreme
illumination. Nevertheless, this modality falls short in spatial resolution and
leads to a low level of visual richness and clarity. Pursuing hardware upgrades
is expensive and might cause compromised performance due to more burdens on
computational requirements. Another option is to harness offline, plug-in-play
super-resolution solutions. However, existing ones, which demand substantial
sample volumes for lengthy training on massive computing resources, are largely
restricted by real data availability owing to the current imperfect high-
resolution devices, as well as the randomness and variability of motion. To
tackle these challenges, we introduce the first self-supervised neuromorphic
super-resolution prototype. It can be self-adaptive to per input source from any
low-resolution camera to estimate an optimal, high-resolution counterpart of any
scale, without the need of side knowledge and prior training. Evaluated on
downstream tasks, such a simple yet effective method can obtain competitive
results against the state-of-the-arts, significantly promoting flexibility but
not sacrificing accuracy. It also delivers enhancements for inferior natural
images and optical micrographs acquired under non-ideal imaging conditions,
breaking through the limitations that are challenging to overcome with frame-
based techniques. In the current landscape where the use of high-resolution
cameras for event-based sensing remains an open debate, our solution is a cost-
efficient and practical alternative, paving the way for more intelligent imaging
systems.
