Title: Explainable AI Enhances Glaucoma Referrals, Yet the Human-AI Team Still
Falls Short of the AI Alone
Authors: Catalina Gomez, Ruolin Wang, Katharina Breininger, Corinne Casey, Chris
Bradley, Mitchell Pavlak, Alex Pham, Jithin Yohannan, Mathias Unberath
ID: 2407.11974
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.11974

Abstract:
Primary care providers are vital for initial triage and referrals to specialty
care. In glaucoma, asymptomatic and fast progression can lead to vision loss,
necessitating timely referrals to specialists. However, primary eye care
providers may not identify urgent cases, potentially delaying care. Artificial
Intelligence (AI) offering explanations could enhance their referral decisions.
We investigate how various AI explanations help providers distinguish between
patients needing immediate or non-urgent specialist referrals. We built
explainable AI algorithms to predict glaucoma surgery needs from routine eyecare
data as a proxy for identifying high-risk patients. We incorporated intrinsic
and post-hoc explainability and conducted an online study with optometrists to
assess human-AI team performance, measuring referral accuracy and analyzing
interactions with AI, including agreement rates, task time, and user experience
perceptions. AI support enhanced referral accuracy among 87 participants
(59.9%/50.8% with/without AI), though Human-AI teams underperformed compared to
AI alone. Participants believed they included AI advice more when using the
intrinsic model, and perceived it more useful and promising. Without
explanations, deviations from AI recommendations increased. AI support did not
increase workload, confidence, and trust, but reduced challenges. On a separate
test set, our black-box and intrinsic models achieved an accuracy of 77% and
71%, respectively, in predicting surgical outcomes. We identify opportunities of
human-AI teaming for glaucoma management in primary eye care, noting that while
AI enhances referral accuracy, it also shows a performance gap compared to AI
alone, even with explanations. Human involvement remains essential in medical
decision making, underscoring the need for future research to optimize
collaboration, ensuring positive experiences and safe AI use.
