Title: Navigating the swarm: Deep neural networks command emergent behaviours
Authors: Dongjo Kim, Jeongsu Lee, Ho-Young Kim
ID: 2407.11330
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.11330

Abstract:
Interacting individuals in complex systems often give rise to coherent motion
exhibiting coordinated global structures. Such phenomena are ubiquitously
observed in nature, from cell migration, bacterial swarms, animal and insect
groups, and even human societies. Primary mechanisms responsible for the
emergence of collective behavior have been extensively identified, including
local alignments based on average or relative velocity, non-local pairwise
repulsive-attractive interactions such as distance-based potentials, interplay
between local and non-local interactions, and cognitive-based inhomogeneous
interactions. However, discovering how to adapt these mechanisms to modulate
emergent behaviours remains elusive. Here, we demonstrate that it is possible to
generate coordinated structures in collective behavior at desired moments with
intended global patterns by fine-tuning an inter-agent interaction rule. Our
strategy employs deep neural networks, obeying the laws of dynamics, to find
interaction rules that command desired collective structures. The decomposition
of interaction rules into distancing and aligning forces, expressed by
polynomial series, facilitates the training of neural networks to propose
desired interaction models. Presented examples include altering the mean radius
and size of clusters in vortical swarms, timing of transitions from random to
ordered states, and continuously shifting between typical modes of collective
motions. This strategy can even be leveraged to superimpose collective modes,
resulting in hitherto unexplored but highly practical hybrid collective
patterns, such as protective security formations. Our findings reveal innovative
strategies for creating and controlling collective motion, paving the way for
new applications in robotic swarm operations, active matter organisation, and
for the uncovering of obscure interaction rules in biological systems.
