Title: Automated Code-centric Software Vulnerability Assessment: How Far Are We?
An Empirical Study in C/C++
Authors: Anh The Nguyen, Triet Huynh Minh Le, M. Ali Babar
ID: 2407.17053
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.17053

Abstract:
Background: The C and C++ languages hold significant importance in Software
Engineering research because of their widespread use in practice. Numerous
studies have utilized Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) techniques to
detect software vulnerabilities (SVs) in the source code written in these
languages. However, the application of these techniques in function-level SV
assessment has been largely unexplored. SV assessment is increasingly crucial as
it provides detailed information on the exploitability, impacts, and severity of
security defects, thereby aiding in their prioritization and remediation. Aims:
We conduct the first empirical study to investigate and compare the performance
of ML and DL models, many of which have been used for SV detection, for
function-level SV assessment in C/C++. Method: Using 9,993 vulnerable C/C++
functions, we evaluated the performance of six multi-class ML models and five
multi-class DL models for the SV assessment at the function level based on the
Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS). We further explore multi-task
learning, which can leverage common vulnerable code to predict all SV assessment
outputs simultaneously in a single model, and compare the effectiveness and
efficiency of this model type with those of the original multi-class models.
Results: We show that ML has matching or even better performance compared to the
multi-class DL models for function-level SV assessment with significantly less
training time. Employing multi-task learning allows the DL models to perform
significantly better, with an average of 8-22% increase in Matthews Correlation
Coefficient (MCC). Conclusions: We distill the practices of using data-driven
techniques for function-level SV assessment in C/C++, including the use of
multi-task DL to balance efficiency and effectiveness. This can establish a
strong foundation for future work in this area.
