Title: GitHub Marketplace for Automation and Innovation in Software Production
Authors: SK Golam Saroar, Waseefa Ahmed, Elmira Onagh, Maleknaz Nayebi
ID: 2407.05519
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.05519

Abstract:
GitHub, renowned for facilitating collaborative code version control and
software production in software teams, expanded its services in 2017 by
introducing GitHub Marketplace. This online platform hosts automation tools to
assist developers with the production of their GitHub-hosted projects, and it
has become a valuable source of information on the tools used in the Open Source
Software (OSS) community. In this exploratory study, we introduce GitHub
Marketplace as a software marketplace by comprehensively exploring the
platform's characteristics, features, and policies and identifying common themes
in production automation. Further, we explore popular tools among practitioners
and researchers and highlight disparities in the approach to these tools between
industry and academia. We adopted the conceptual framework of software app
stores from previous studies to examine 8,318 automated production tools (440
Apps and 7,878 Actions) across 32 categories on GitHub Marketplace. We explored
and described the policies of this marketplace as a unique platform where
developers share production tools for the use of other developers. Furthermore,
we systematically mapped 515 research papers published from 2000 to 2021 and
compared open-source academic production tools with those available in the
marketplace. We found that although some of the automation topics in literature
are widely used in practice, they have yet to align with the state of practice
for automated production. We discovered that practitioners often use automation
tools for tasks like "Continuous Integration" and "Utilities," while researchers
tend to focus more on "Code Quality" and "Testing". Our study illuminates the
landscape of open-source tools for automation production in industry and
research.
