Title: Promoting AI Competencies for Medical Students: A Scoping Review on
Frameworks, Programs, and Tools
Authors: Yingbo Ma, Yukyeong Song, Jeremy A. Balch, Yuanfang Ren, Divya
Vellanki, Zhenhong Hu, Meghan Brennan, Suraj Kolla, Ziyuan Guan, Brooke
Armfield, Tezcan Ozrazgat-Baslanti, Parisa Rashidi, Tyler J. Loftus, Azra
Bihorac, Benjamin Shickel
ID: 2407.18939
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.18939

Abstract:
As more clinical workflows continue to be augmented by artificial intelligence
(AI), AI literacy among physicians will become a critical requirement for
ensuring safe and ethical AI-enabled patient care. Despite the evolving
importance of AI in healthcare, the extent to which it has been adopted into
traditional and often-overloaded medical curricula is currently unknown. In a
scoping review of 1,699 articles published between January 2016 and June 2024,
we identified 18 studies which propose guiding frameworks, and 11 studies
documenting real-world instruction, centered around the integration of AI into
medical education. We found that comprehensive guidelines will require greater
clinical relevance and personalization to suit medical student interests and
career trajectories. Current efforts highlight discrepancies in the teaching
guidelines, emphasizing AI evaluation and ethics over technical topics such as
data science and coding. Additionally, we identified several challenges
associated with integrating AI training into the medical education program,
including a lack of guidelines to define medical students AI literacy, a
perceived lack of proven clinical value, and a scarcity of qualified
instructors. With this knowledge, we propose an AI literacy framework to define
competencies for medical students. To prioritize relevant and personalized AI
education, we categorize literacy into four dimensions: Foundational, Practical,
Experimental, and Ethical, with tailored learning objectives to the pre-
clinical, clinical, and clinical research stages of medical education. This
review provides a road map for developing practical and relevant education
strategies for building an AI-competent healthcare workforce.
