Title: Operationalizing the Blueprint for an AI Bill of Rights: Recommendations
for Practitioners, Researchers, and Policy Makers
Authors: Alex Oesterling, Usha Bhalla, Suresh Venkatasubramanian, Himabindu
Lakkaraju
ID: 2407.08689
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.08689

Abstract:
As Artificial Intelligence (AI) tools are increasingly employed in diverse real-
world applications, there has been significant interest in regulating these
tools. To this end, several regulatory frameworks have been introduced by
different countries worldwide. For example, the European Union recently passed
the AI Act, the White House issued an Executive Order on safe, secure, and
trustworthy AI, and the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy
issued the Blueprint for an AI Bill of Rights (AI BoR). Many of these frameworks
emphasize the need for auditing and improving the trustworthiness of AI tools,
underscoring the importance of safety, privacy, explainability, fairness, and
human fallback options. Although these regulatory frameworks highlight the
necessity of enforcement, practitioners often lack detailed guidance on
implementing them. Furthermore, the extensive research on operationalizing each
of these aspects is frequently buried in technical papers that are difficult for
practitioners to parse. In this write-up, we address this shortcoming by
providing an accessible overview of existing literature related to
operationalizing regulatory principles. We provide easy-to-understand summaries
of state-of-the-art literature and highlight various gaps that exist between
regulatory guidelines and existing AI research, including the trade-offs that
emerge during operationalization. We hope that this work not only serves as a
starting point for practitioners interested in learning more about
operationalizing the regulatory guidelines outlined in the Blueprint for an AI
BoR but also provides researchers with a list of critical open problems and gaps
between regulations and state-of-the-art AI research. Finally, we note that this
is a working paper and we invite feedback in line with the purpose of this
document as described in the introduction.
