Title: Optimizing Age of Information in Vehicular Edge Computing with Federated
Graph Neural Network Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Authors: Wenhua Wang, Qiong Wu, Pingyi Fan, Nan Cheng, Wen Chen, Jiangzhou Wang,
Khaled B. Letaief
ID: 2407.02342
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.02342

Abstract:
With the rapid development of intelligent vehicles and Intelligent Transport
Systems (ITS), the sensors such as cameras and LiDAR installed on intelligent
vehicles provides higher capacity of executing computation-intensive and delay-
sensitive tasks, thereby raising deployment costs. To address this issue,
Vehicular Edge Computing (VEC) has been proposed to process data through Road
Side Units (RSUs) to support real-time applications. This paper focuses on the
Age of Information (AoI) as a key metric for data freshness and explores task
offloading issues for vehicles under RSU communication resource constraints. We
adopt a Multi-agent Deep Reinforcement Learning (MADRL) approach, allowing
vehicles to autonomously make optimal data offloading decisions. However, MADRL
poses risks of vehicle information leakage during communication learning and
centralized training. To mitigate this, we employ a Federated Learning (FL)
framework that shares model parameters instead of raw data to protect the
privacy of vehicle users. Building on this, we propose an innovative distributed
federated learning framework combining Graph Neural Networks (GNN), named
Federated Graph Neural Network Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (FGNN-MADRL),
to optimize AoI across the system. For the first time, road scenarios are
constructed as graph data structures, and a GNN-based federated learning
framework is proposed, effectively combining distributed and centralized
federated aggregation. Furthermore, we propose a new MADRL algorithm that
simplifies decision making and enhances offloading efficiency, further reducing
the decision complexity. Simulation results demonstrate the superiority of our
proposed approach to other methods through simulations.
