Title: MRI Volume-Based Robust Brain Age Estimation Using Weight-Shared Spatial
Attention in 3D CNNs
Authors: Vamshi Krishna Kancharla, Neelam Sinha
ID: 2407.06686
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.06686

Abstract:
Important applications of advancements in machine learning, are in the area of
healthcare, more so for neurological disorder detection. A crucial step towards
understanding the neurological status, is to estimate the brain age using
structural MRI volumes, in order to measure its deviation from chronological
age. Factors that contribute to brain age are best captured using a data-driven
approach, such as deep learning. However, it places a huge demand on the
availability of diverse datasets. In this work, we propose a robust brain age
estimation paradigm that utilizes a 3D CNN model, by-passing the need for model-
retraining across datasets. The proposed model consists of seven 3D CNN layers,
with a shared spatial attention layer incorporated at each CNN layer followed by
five dense layers. The novelty of the proposed method lies in the idea of
spatial attention module, with shared weights across the CNN layers. This weight
sharing ensures directed attention to specific brain regions, for localizing
age-related features within the data, lending robustness.
  The proposed model, trained on ADNI dataset comprising 516 T1 weighted MRI
volumes of healthy subjects, resulted in Mean Absolute Error (MAE) of 1.662
years, which is an improvement of 1.688 years over the state-of-the-art (SOTA)
model, based on disjoint test samples from the same repository. To illustrate
generalizability, the same pipeline was utilized on volumes from a publicly
available source called OASIS3. From OASIS3, MRI volumes 890 healthy subjects
were utilized resulting in MAE of 2.265 years. Due to diversity in acquisitions
across multiple sites, races and genetic factors, traditional CNN models are not
guaranteed to prioritize brain regions crucial for age estimation. In contrast,
the proposed weight-shared spatial attention module, directs attention on
specific regions, required for the estimation.
