Title: PINNs-MPF: A Physics-Informed Neural Network Framework for Multi-Phase-
Field Simulation of Interface Dynamics
Authors: Seifallah Elfetni, Reza Darvishi Kamachali
ID: 2407.02230
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.02230

Abstract:
We present an application of Physics-Informed Neural Networks to handle
MultiPhase-Field simulations of microstructure evolution. It has been showcased
that a combination of optimization techniques extended and adapted from the
PINNs literature, and the introduction of specific techniques inspired by the
MPF Method background, is required. The numerical resolution is realized through
a multi-variable time-series problem by using fully discrete resolution. Within
each interval, space, time, and phases are treated separately, constituting
discrete subdomains. An extended multi-networking concept is implemented to
subdivide the simulation domain into multiple batches, with each batch
associated with an independent Neural Network trained to predict the solution.
To ensure efficient interaction across different phasesand in the spatio-
temporal-phasic subdomain, a Master NN handles efficient interaction among the
multiple networks, as well as the transfer of learning in different directions.
A set of systematic simulations with increasing complexity was performed, that
benchmarks various critical aspects of MPF simulations, including different
geometries, types of interface dynamics and the evolution of an interfacial
triple junction. A comprehensive approach is adopted to specifically focus the
attention on the interfacial regions through an automatic and dynamic meshing
process, significantly simplifying the tuning of hyper-parameters and serving as
a fundamental key for addressing MPF problems using Machine Learning. The
pyramidal training approach is proposed to the PINN community as a dual-impact
method: it facilitates the initialization of training and allows an extended
transfer of learning. The proposed PINNs-MPF framework successfully reproduces
benchmark tests with high fidelity and Mean Squared Error loss values ranging
from 10$^{-4}$ to 10$^{-6}$ compared to ground truth solutions.
