Title: Joint Hypergraph Rewiring and Memory-Augmented Forecasting Techniques in
Digital Twin Technology
Authors: Sagar Srinivas Sakhinana, Krishna Sai Sudhir Aripirala, Shivam Gupta,
Venkataramana Runkana
ID: 2408.12634
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.12634

Abstract:
Digital Twin technology creates virtual replicas of physical objects, processes,
or systems by replicating their properties, data, and behaviors. This advanced
technology offers a range of intelligent functionalities, such as modeling,
simulation, and data-driven decision-making, that facilitate design
optimization, performance estimation, and monitoring operations. Forecasting
plays a pivotal role in Digital Twin technology, as it enables the prediction of
future outcomes, supports informed decision-making, minimizes risks, driving
improvements in efficiency, productivity, and cost reduction. Recently, Digital
Twin technology has leveraged Graph forecasting techniques in large-scale
complex sensor networks to enable accurate forecasting and simulation of diverse
scenarios, fostering proactive and data-driven decision making. However,
existing Graph forecasting techniques lack scalability for many real-world
applications. They have limited ability to adapt to non-stationary environments,
retain past knowledge, lack a mechanism to capture the higher order spatio-
temporal dynamics, and estimate uncertainty in model predictions. To surmount
the challenges, we introduce a hybrid architecture that enhances the hypergraph
representation learning backbone by incorporating fast adaptation to new
patterns and memory-based retrieval of past knowledge. This balance aims to
improve the slowly-learned backbone and achieve better performance in adapting
to recent changes. In addition, it models the time-varying uncertainty of multi-
horizon forecasts, providing estimates of prediction uncertainty. Our
forecasting architecture has been validated through ablation studies and has
demonstrated promising results across multiple benchmark datasets, surpassing
state-ofthe-art forecasting methods by a significant margin.
