Title: HAIGEN: Towards Human-AI Collaboration for Facilitating Creativity and
Style Generation in Fashion Design
Authors: Jianan Jiang, Di Wu, Hanhui Deng, Yidan Long, Wenyi Tang, Xiang Li, Can
Liu, Zhanpeng Jin, Wenlei Zhang, Tangquan Qi
ID: 2408.00855
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.00855

Abstract:
The process of fashion design usually involves sketching, refining, and
coloring, with designers drawing inspiration from various images to fuel their
creative endeavors. However, conventional image search methods often yield
irrelevant results, impeding the design process. Moreover, creating and coloring
sketches can be time-consuming and demanding, acting as a bottleneck in the
design workflow. In this work, we introduce HAIGEN (Human-AI Collaboration for
GENeration), an efficient fashion design system for Human-AI collaboration
developed to aid designers. Specifically, HAIGEN consists of four modules. T2IM,
located in the cloud, generates reference inspiration images directly from text
prompts. With three other modules situated locally, the I2SM batch generates the
image material library into a certain designer-style sketch material library.
The SRM recommends similar sketches in the generated library to designers for
further refinement, and the STM colors the refined sketch according to the
styles of inspiration images. Through our system, any designer can perform local
personalized fine-tuning and leverage the powerful generation capabilities of
large models in the cloud, streamlining the entire design development process.
Given that our approach integrates both cloud and local model deployment
schemes, it effectively safeguards design privacy by avoiding the need to upload
personalized data from local designers. We validated the effectiveness of each
module through extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments. User surveys
also confirmed that HAIGEN offers significant advantages in design efficiency,
positioning it as a new generation of aid-tool for designers.
