Title: The AI Risk Repository: A Comprehensive Meta-Review, Database, and
Taxonomy of Risks From Artificial Intelligence
Authors: Peter Slattery, Alexander K. Saeri, Emily A. C. Grundy, Jess Graham,
Michael Noetel, Risto Uuk, James Dao, Soroush Pour, Stephen Casper, Neil
Thompson
ID: 2408.12622
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.12622

Abstract:
The risks posed by Artificial Intelligence (AI) are of considerable concern to
academics, auditors, policymakers, AI companies, and the public. However, a lack
of shared understanding of AI risks can impede our ability to comprehensively
discuss, research, and react to them. This paper addresses this gap by creating
an AI Risk Repository to serve as a common frame of reference. This comprises a
living database of 777 risks extracted from 43 taxonomies, which can be filtered
based on two overarching taxonomies and easily accessed, modified, and updated
via our website and online spreadsheets. We construct our Repository with a
systematic review of taxonomies and other structured classifications of AI risk
followed by an expert consultation. We develop our taxonomies of AI risk using a
best-fit framework synthesis. Our high-level Causal Taxonomy of AI Risks
classifies each risk by its causal factors (1) Entity: Human, AI; (2)
Intentionality: Intentional, Unintentional; and (3) Timing: Pre-deployment;
Post-deployment. Our mid-level Domain Taxonomy of AI Risks classifies risks into
seven AI risk domains: (1) Discrimination & toxicity, (2) Privacy & security,
(3) Misinformation, (4) Malicious actors & misuse, (5) Human-computer
interaction, (6) Socioeconomic & environmental, and (7) AI system safety,
failures, & limitations. These are further divided into 23 subdomains. The AI
Risk Repository is, to our knowledge, the first attempt to rigorously curate,
analyze, and extract AI risk frameworks into a publicly accessible,
comprehensive, extensible, and categorized risk database. This creates a
foundation for a more coordinated, coherent, and complete approach to defining,
auditing, and managing the risks posed by AI systems.
