Title: An Information-Theoretic Approach to Generalization Theory
Authors: Borja Rodríguez-Gálvez, Ragnar Thobaben, Mikael Skoglund
ID: 2408.13275
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.13275

Abstract:
We investigate the in-distribution generalization of machine learning
algorithms. We depart from traditional complexity-based approaches by analyzing
information-theoretic bounds that quantify the dependence between a learning
algorithm and the training data. We consider two categories of generalization
guarantees:
  1) Guarantees in expectation: These bounds measure performance in the average
case. Here, the dependence between the algorithm and the data is often captured
by information measures. While these measures offer an intuitive interpretation,
they overlook the geometry of the algorithm's hypothesis class. Here, we
introduce bounds using the Wasserstein distance to incorporate geometry, and a
structured, systematic method to derive bounds capturing the dependence between
the algorithm and an individual datum, and between the algorithm and subsets of
the training data.
  2) PAC-Bayesian guarantees: These bounds measure the performance level with
high probability. Here, the dependence between the algorithm and the data is
often measured by the relative entropy. We establish connections between the
Seeger--Langford and Catoni's bounds, revealing that the former is optimized by
the Gibbs posterior. We introduce novel, tighter bounds for various types of
loss functions. To achieve this, we introduce a new technique to optimize
parameters in probabilistic statements.
  To study the limitations of these approaches, we present a counter-example
where most of the information-theoretic bounds fail while traditional approaches
do not. Finally, we explore the relationship between privacy and generalization.
We show that algorithms with a bounded maximal leakage generalize. For discrete
data, we derive new bounds for differentially private algorithms that guarantee
generalization even with a constant privacy parameter, which is in contrast to
previous bounds in the literature.
