Title: A Multi-Year Grey Literature Review on AI-assisted Test Automation
Authors: Filippo Ricca, Alessandro Marchetto, Andrea Stocco
ID: 2408.06224
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.06224

Abstract:
Context: Test Automation (TA) techniques are crucial for quality assurance in
software engineering but face limitations such as high test suite maintenance
costs and the need for extensive programming skills. Artificial Intelligence
(AI) offers new opportunities to address these issues through automation and
improved practices. Objectives: Given the prevalent usage of AI in industry,
sources of truth are held in grey literature as well as the minds of
professionals, stakeholders, developers, and end-users. This study surveys grey
literature to explore how AI is adopted in TA, focusing on the problems it
solves, its solutions, and the available tools. Additionally, the study gathers
expert insights to understand AI's current and future role in TA. Methods: We
reviewed over 3,600 grey literature sources over five years, including blogs,
white papers, and user manuals, and finally filtered 342 documents to develop
taxonomies of TA problems and AI solutions. We also cataloged 100 AI-driven TA
tools and interviewed five expert software testers to gain insights into AI's
current and future role in TA. Results: The study found that manual test code
development and maintenance are the main challenges in TA. In contrast,
automated test generation and self-healing test scripts are the most common AI
solutions. We identified 100 AI-based TA tools, with Applitools, Testim,
Functionize, AccelQ, and Mabl being the most adopted in practice. Conclusion:
This paper offers a detailed overview of AI's impact on TA through grey
literature analysis and expert interviews. It presents new taxonomies of TA
problems and AI solutions, provides a catalog of AI-driven tools, and relates
solutions to problems and tools to solutions. Interview insights further
revealed the state and future potential of AI in TA. Our findings support
practitioners in selecting TA tools and guide future research directions.
