Title: OpenEP: Open-Ended Future Event Prediction
Authors: Yong Guan, Hao Peng, Xiaozhi Wang, Lei Hou, Juanzi Li
ID: 2408.06578
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.06578

Abstract:
Future event prediction (FEP) is a long-standing and crucial task in the world,
as understanding the evolution of events enables early risk identification,
informed decision-making, and strategic planning. Existing work typically treats
event prediction as classification tasks and confines the outcomes of future
events to a fixed scope, such as yes/no questions, candidate set, and taxonomy,
which is difficult to include all possible outcomes of future events. In this
paper, we introduce OpenEP (an Open-Ended Future Event Prediction task), which
generates flexible and diverse predictions aligned with real-world scenarios.
This is mainly reflected in two aspects: firstly, the predictive questions are
diverse, covering different stages of event development and perspectives;
secondly, the outcomes are flexible, without constraints on scope or format. To
facilitate the study of this task, we construct OpenEPBench, an open-ended
future event prediction dataset. For question construction, we pose questions
from seven perspectives, including location, time, event development, event
outcome, event impact, event response, and other, to facilitate an in-depth
analysis and understanding of the comprehensive evolution of events. For outcome
construction, we collect free-form text containing the outcomes as ground truth
to provide semantically complete and detail-enriched outcomes. Furthermore, we
propose StkFEP, a stakeholder-enhanced future event prediction framework, that
incorporates event characteristics for open-ended settings. Our method extracts
stakeholders involved in events to extend questions to gather diverse
information. We also collect historically events that are relevant and similar
to the question to reveal potential evolutionary patterns. Experiment results
indicate that accurately predicting future events in open-ended settings is
challenging for existing LLMs.
