Title: A Novel Generative Artificial Intelligence Method for Interference Study
on Multiplex Brightfield Immunohistochemistry Images
Authors: Satarupa Mukherjee, Jim Martin, Yao Nie
ID: 2408.07860
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.07860

Abstract:
Multiplex brightfield imaging offers the advantage of simultaneously analyzing
multiple biomarkers on a single slide, as opposed to single biomarker labeling
on multiple consecutive slides. To accurately analyze multiple biomarkers
localized at the same cellular compartment, two representative biomarker sets
were selected as assay models - cMET-PDL1-EGFR and CD8-LAG3-PDL1, where all
three biomarkers can co-localize on the cell membrane. One of the most crucial
preliminary stages for analyzing such assay is identifying each unique chromogen
on individual cells. This is a challenging problem due to the co-localization of
membrane stains from all the three biomarkers. It requires advanced color
unmixing for creating the equivalent singleplex images from each triplex image
for each biomarker.
  In this project, we developed a cycle-Generative Adversarial Network (cycle-
GAN) method for unmixing the triplex images generated from the above-mentioned
assays. Three different models were designed to generate the singleplex image
for each of the three stains Tamra (purple), QM-Dabsyl (yellow) and Green. A
notable novelty of our approach was that the input to the network were images in
the optical density domain instead of conventionally used RGB images. The use of
the optical density domain helped in reducing the blurriness of the synthetic
singleplex images, which was often observed when the network was trained on RGB
images.
  The cycle-GAN models were validated on 10,800 lung, gastric and colon images
for the cMET-PDL1-EGFR assay and 3600 colon images for the CD8-LAG3-PDL1 assay.
Visual as well as quantified assessments demonstrated that the proposed method
is effective and efficient when compared with the manual reviewing results and
is readily applicable to various multiplex assays.
