Title: People over trust AI-generated medical responses and view them to be as
valid as doctors, despite low accuracy
Authors: Shruthi Shekar, Pat Pataranutaporn, Chethan Sarabu, Guillermo A.
Cecchi, Pattie Maes
ID: 2408.15266
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.15266

Abstract:
This paper presents a comprehensive analysis of how AI-generated medical
responses are perceived and evaluated by non-experts. A total of 300
participants gave evaluations for medical responses that were either written by
a medical doctor on an online healthcare platform, or generated by a large
language model and labeled by physicians as having high or low accuracy. Results
showed that participants could not effectively distinguish between AI-generated
and Doctors' responses and demonstrated a preference for AI-generated responses,
rating High Accuracy AI-generated responses as significantly more valid,
trustworthy, and complete/satisfactory. Low Accuracy AI-generated responses on
average performed very similar to Doctors' responses, if not more. Participants
not only found these low-accuracy AI-generated responses to be valid,
trustworthy, and complete/satisfactory but also indicated a high tendency to
follow the potentially harmful medical advice and incorrectly seek unnecessary
medical attention as a result of the response provided. This problematic
reaction was comparable if not more to the reaction they displayed towards
doctors' responses. This increased trust placed on inaccurate or inappropriate
AI-generated medical advice can lead to misdiagnosis and harmful consequences
for individuals seeking help. Further, participants were more trusting of High
Accuracy AI-generated responses when told they were given by a doctor and
experts rated AI-generated responses significantly higher when the source of the
response was unknown. Both experts and non-experts exhibited bias, finding AI-
generated responses to be more thorough and accurate than Doctors' responses but
still valuing the involvement of a Doctor in the delivery of their medical
advice. Ensuring AI systems are implemented with medical professionals should be
the future of using AI for the delivery of medical advice.
