Title: Hierarchical Structured Neural Network: Efficient Retrieval Scaling for
Large Scale Recommendation
Authors: Kaushik Rangadurai, Siyang Yuan, Minhui Huang, Yiqun Liu, Golnaz
Ghasemiesfeh, Yunchen Pu, Haiyu Lu, Xingfeng He, Fangzhou Xu, Andrew Cui,
Vidhoon Viswanathan, Lin Yang, Liang Wang, Jiyan Yang, Chonglin Sun
ID: 2408.06653
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.06653

Abstract:
Retrieval, the initial stage of a recommendation system, is tasked with down-
selecting items from a pool of tens of millions of candidates to a few
thousands. Embedding Based Retrieval (EBR) has been a typical choice for this
problem, addressing the computational demands of deep neural networks across
vast item corpora. EBR utilizes Two Tower or Siamese Networks to learn
representations for users and items, and employ Approximate Nearest Neighbor
(ANN) search to efficiently retrieve relevant items. Despite its popularity in
industry, EBR faces limitations. The Two Tower architecture, relying on a single
dot product interaction, struggles to capture complex data distributions due to
limited capability in learning expressive interactions between users and items.
Additionally, ANN index building and representation learning for user and item
are often separate, leading to inconsistencies exacerbated by representation
(e.g. continuous online training) and item drift (e.g. items expired and new
items added). In this paper, we introduce the Hierarchical Structured Neural
Network (HSNN), an efficient deep neural network model to learn intricate user
and item interactions beyond the commonly used dot product in retrieval tasks,
achieving sublinear computational costs relative to corpus size. A Modular
Neural Network (MoNN) is designed to maintain high expressiveness for
interaction learning while ensuring efficiency. A mixture of MoNNs operate on a
hierarchical item index to achieve extensive computation sharing, enabling it to
scale up to large corpus size. MoNN and the hierarchical index are jointly
learnt to continuously adapt to distribution shifts in both user interests and
item distributions. HSNN achieves substantial improvement in offline evaluation
compared to prevailing methods.
