Title: Fluid-network relations: decay laws meet with spatial self-similarity,
scale-invariance, and control scaling
Authors: Yang Tian, Pei Sun, Yizhou Xu
ID: 2408.13181
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.13181

Abstract:
Diverse implicit structures of fluids are discovered lately, providing
opportunities to study the physics of fluids applying network analysis. Although
considerable works devote to identifying informative network structures of
fluids, we have limited understanding about the information these networks
convey about fluids. To analyze how fluid mechanics is embodied in network
topology or vice versa, we reveal a set of fluid-network relations that quantify
the interactions between fundamental fluid properties (e.g., kinetic energy and
enstrophy decay laws) and defining network characteristics (e.g., spatial self-
similarity, scale-invariance, and control scaling). By analyzing spatial self-
similarity in classic and generalized contexts, we first assess the self-
similarity of vortical interactions in fluid flows. Deviations from self-
similarity in networks exhibit power-law scaling behaviors with respect to fluid
properties, suggesting the diversity among vortex as essential to self-similar
fluid flows. Then, the same paradigm is adopted to investigate scale-invariance
using renormalization groups, which reveals that the breaking extents of scale-
invariance in networks, similar to those of spatial self-similarity, also scale
with fluid properties in power-law manners. Furthermore, we define a control
problem on networks to study the propagation of perturbations through vortical
interactions over different ranges. The minimum cost of controlling vortical
networks exponentially scales with range diameters (i.e., control distances),
whose growth rates experiences temporal decays. We show that this temporal decay
speed is fully determined by fluid properties in power-law scaling behaviours.
In summary, these fluid-network relations enable a deeper understanding of
implicit fluid structures and their interactions with fluid dynamics.
