Title: Leveraging Digital Twin Technologies for Public Space Protection and
Vulnerability Assessment
Authors: Artemis Stefanidou, Jorgen Cani, Thomas Papadopoulos, Panagiotis
Radoglou-Grammatikis, Panagiotis Sarigiannidis, Iraklis Varlamis, Georgios Th.
Papadopoulos
ID: 2408.17136
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.17136

Abstract:
Over the recent years, the protection of the so-called `soft-targets', i.e.
locations easily accessible by the general public with relatively low, though,
security measures, has emerged as a rather challenging and increasingly
important issue. The complexity and seriousness of this security threat growths
nowadays exponentially, due to the emergence of new advanced technologies (e.g.
Artificial Intelligence (AI), Autonomous Vehicles (AVs), 3D printing, etc.);
especially when it comes to large-scale, popular and diverse public spaces. In
this paper, a novel Digital Twin-as-a-Security-Service (DTaaSS) architecture is
introduced for holistically and significantly enhancing the protection of public
spaces (e.g. metro stations, leisure sites, urban squares, etc.). The proposed
framework combines a Digital Twin (DT) conceptualization with additional
cutting-edge technologies, including Internet of Things (IoT), cloud computing,
Big Data analytics and AI. In particular, DTaaSS comprises a holistic, real-
time, large-scale, comprehensive and data-driven security solution for the
efficient/robust protection of public spaces, supporting: a) data collection and
analytics, b) area monitoring/control and proactive threat detection, c)
incident/attack prediction, and d) quantitative and data-driven vulnerability
assessment. Overall, the designed architecture exhibits increased potential in
handling complex, hybrid and combined threats over large, critical and popular
soft-targets. The applicability and robustness of DTaaSS is discussed in detail
against representative and diverse real-world application scenarios, including
complex attacks to: a) a metro station, b) a leisure site, and c) a cathedral
square.
