Title: Navigating Governance Paradigms: A Cross-Regional Comparative Study of
Generative AI Governance Processes & Principles
Authors: Jose Luna, Ivan Tan, Xiaofei Xie, Lingxiao Jiang
ID: 2408.16771
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.16771

Abstract:
As Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) technologies evolve at an
unprecedented rate, global governance approaches struggle to keep pace with the
technology, highlighting a critical issue in the governance adaptation of
significant challenges. Depicting the nuances of nascent and diverse governance
approaches based on risks, rules, outcomes, principles, or a mix across
different regions around the globe is fundamental to discern discrepancies and
convergences and to shed light on specific limitations that need to be
addressed, thereby facilitating the safe and trustworthy adoption of GenAI. In
response to the need and the evolving nature of GenAI, this paper seeks to
provide a collective view of different governance approaches around the world.
Our research introduces a Harmonized GenAI Framework, "H-GenAIGF," based on the
current governance approaches of six regions: European Union (EU), United States
(US), China (CN), Canada (CA), United Kingdom (UK), and Singapore (SG). We have
identified four constituents, fifteen processes, twenty-five sub-processes, and
nine principles that aid the governance of GenAI, thus providing a comprehensive
perspective on the current state of GenAI governance. In addition, we present a
comparative analysis to facilitate the identification of common ground and
distinctions based on the coverage of the processes by each region. The results
show that risk-based approaches allow for better coverage of the processes,
followed by mixed approaches. Other approaches lag behind, covering less than
50% of the processes. Most prominently, the analysis demonstrates that among the
regions, only one process aligns across all approaches, highlighting the lack of
consistent and executable provisions. Moreover, our case study on ChatGPT
reveals process coverage deficiency, showing that harmonization of approaches is
necessary to find alignment for GenAI governance.
