Title: MyoGestic: EMG Interfacing Framework for Decoding Multiple Spared Degrees
of Freedom of the Hand in Individuals with Neural Lesions
Authors: Raul C. Sîmpetru, Dominik I. Braun, Arndt U. Simon, Michael März, Vlad
Cnejevici, Daniela Souza de Oliveira, Nico Weber, Jonas Walter, Jörg Franke,
Daniel Höglinger, Cosima Prahm, Matthias Ponfick, Alessandro Del Vecchio
ID: 2408.07817
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.07817

Abstract:
Restoring limb motor function in individuals with spinal cord injury (SCI),
stroke, or amputation remains a critical challenge, one which affects millions
worldwide. Recent studies show through surface electromyography (EMG) that
spared motor neurons can still be voluntarily controlled, even without visible
limb movement . These signals can be decoded and used for motor intent
estimation; however, current wearable solutions lack the necessary hardware and
software for intuitive interfacing of the spared degrees of freedom after neural
injuries. To address these limitations, we developed a wireless, high-density
EMG bracelet, coupled with a novel software framework, MyoGestic. Our system
allows rapid and tailored adaptability of machine learning models to the needs
of the users, facilitating real-time decoding of multiple spared distinctive
degrees of freedom. In our study, we successfully decoded the motor intent from
two participants with SCI, two with spinal stroke , and three amputees in real-
time, achieving several controllable degrees of freedom within minutes after
wearing the EMG bracelet. We provide a proof-of-concept that these decoded
signals can be used to control a digitally rendered hand, a wearable orthosis, a
prosthesis, or a 2D cursor. Our framework promotes a participant-centered
approach, allowing immediate feedback integration, thus enhancing the iterative
development of myocontrol algorithms. The proposed open-source software
framework, MyoGestic, allows researchers and patients to focus on the
augmentation and training of the spared degrees of freedom after neural lesions,
thus potentially bridging the gap between research and clinical application and
advancing the development of intuitive EMG interfaces for diverse neural
lesions.
