Title: Uncontrolled learning: co-design of neuromorphic hardware topology for
neuromorphic algorithms
Authors: Frank Barrows, Jonathan Lin, Francesco Caravelli, Dante R. Chialvo
ID: 2408.05183
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.05183

Abstract:
Hardware-based neuromorphic computing remains an elusive goal with the potential
to profoundly impact future technologies and deepen our understanding of
emergent intelligence. The learning-from-mistakes algorithm is one of the few
training algorithms inspired by the brain's simple learning rules, utilizing
inhibition and pruning to demonstrate self-organized learning. Here we implement
this algorithm in purely neuromorphic memristive hardware through a co-design
process. This implementation requires evaluating hardware trade-offs and
constraints. It has been shown that learning-from-mistakes successfully trains
small networks to function as binary classifiers and perceptrons. However,
without tailoring the hardware to the algorithm, performance decreases
exponentially as the network size increases. When implementing neuromorphic
algorithms on neuromorphic hardware, we investigate the trade-offs between
depth, controllability, and capacity, the latter being the number of learnable
patterns. We emphasize the significance of topology and the use of governing
equations, demonstrating theoretical tools to aid in the co-design of
neuromorphic hardware and algorithms. We provide quantitative techniques to
evaluate the computational capacity of a neuromorphic device based on the
measurements performed and the underlying circuit structure. This approach shows
that breaking the symmetry of a neural network can increase both the
controllability and average network capacity. By pruning the circuit,
neuromorphic algorithms in all-memristive device circuits leverage stochastic
resources to drive local contrast in network weights. Our combined experimental
and simulation efforts explore the parameters that make a network suited for
displaying emergent intelligence from simple rules.
