Title: Koopman Operators in Robot Learning
Authors: Lu Shi, Masih Haseli, Giorgos Mamakoukas, Daniel Bruder, Ian Abraham,
Todd Murphey, Jorge Cortes, Konstantinos Karydis
ID: 2408.04200
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.04200

Abstract:
Koopman operator theory offers a rigorous treatment of dynamics and has been
emerging as an alternative modeling and learning-based control method across
various robotics sub-domains. Due to its ability to represent nonlinear dynamics
as a linear (but higher-dimensional) operator, Koopman theory offers a fresh
lens through which to understand and tackle the modeling and control of complex
robotic systems. Moreover, it enables incremental updates and is computationally
inexpensive, thus making it particularly appealing for real-time applications
and online active learning. This review delves deeply into the foundations of
Koopman operator theory and systematically builds a bridge from theoretical
principles to practical robotic applications. We begin by explaining the
mathematical underpinnings of the Koopman framework and discussing approximation
approaches for incorporating inputs into Koopman-based modeling. Foundational
considerations, such as data collection strategies as well as the design of
lifting functions for effective system embedding, are also discussed. We then
explore how Koopman-based models serve as a unifying tool for a range of
robotics tasks, including model-based control, real-time state estimation, and
motion planning. The review proceeds to a survey of cutting-edge research that
demonstrates the versatility and growing impact of Koopman methods across
diverse robotics sub-domains: from aerial and legged platforms to manipulators,
soft-bodied systems, and multi-agent networks. A presentation of more advanced
theoretical topics, necessary to push forward the overall framework, is
included. Finally, we reflect on some key open challenges that remain and
articulate future research directions that will shape the next phase of Koopman-
inspired robotics. To support practical adoption, we provide a hands-on tutorial
with executable code at https://shorturl.at/ouE59.
