Title: Framework for Adoption of Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) in
Education
Authors: Samar Shailendra, Rajan Kadel, Aakanksha Sharma
ID: 2408.01443
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.01443

Abstract:
Contributions: An adoption framework to include GenAI in the university
curriculum. It identifies and highlights the role of different stakeholders
(university management, students, staff, etc.) during the adoption process. It
also proposes an objective approach based upon an evaluation matrix to assess
the success and outcome of the GenAI adoption.
  Background: Universities worldwide are debating and struggling with the
adoption of GenAI in their curriculum. Both the faculty and students are unsure
about the approach in the absence of clear guidelines through the administration
and regulators. This requires an established framework to define a process and
articulate the roles and responsibilities of each stakeholder involved.
  Research Questions: Whether the academic ecosystem requires a methodology to
adopt GenAI into its curriculum? A systematic approach for the academic staff to
ensure the students' learning outcomes are met with the adoption of GenAI. How
to measure and communicate the adoption of GenAI in the university setup?
  Methodology: The methodology employed in this study focuses on examining the
university education system and assessing the opportunities and challenges
related to incorporating GenAI in teaching and learning. Additionally, it
identifies a gap and the absence of a comprehensive framework that obstructs the
effective integration of GenAI within the academic environment.
  Findings: The literature survey results indicate the limited or no adoption of
GenAI by the university, which further reflects the dilemma in the minds of
different stakeholders. For the successful adoption of GenAI, a standard
framework is proposed i) for effective redesign of the course curriculum, ii)
for enabling staff and students, iii) to define an evaluation matrix to measure
the effectiveness and success of the adoption process.
