Title: Hybrid lunar ISRU plant: a comparative analysis with carbothermal
reduction and water extraction
Authors: Kosuke Ikeya, Francisco J. Guerrero-Gonzalez, Luca Kiewiet, Michel-
Alexandre Cardin, Jan Cilliers, Stanley Starr, Kathryn Hadler
ID: 2408.04936
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.04936

Abstract:
To establish a self-sustained human presence in space and to explore deeper into
the solar system, extensive research has been conducted on In-Situ Resource
Utilization (ISRU) systems. Past studies have proposed and researched many
technologies to produce oxygen from regolith, such as carbothermal reduction and
water extraction from icy regolith, to utilize it for astronauts' life support
and as the propellant of space systems. However, determining the most promising
technology remains challenging due to uncertainties in the lunar environment and
processing methods. To better understand the lunar environment and ISRU
operations, it is crucial to gather more information. Motivated by this need for
information gathering, this paper proposes a new ISRU plant architecture
integrating carbothermal reduction of dry regolith and water extraction from icy
regolith. Two different hybrid plant architectures integrating both technologies
(1) in parallel and (2) in series are examined. The former involves mining and
processing in both a Permanently Shadowed Region (PSR) and a peak of eternal
light in parallel, while the latter solely mines in a PSR. In this series hybrid
architecture, the dry regolith tailings from water extraction are further
processed by carbothermal reduction. This paper conducts a comparative analysis
of the landed mass and required power of each plant architecture utilizing
subsystem-level models. Furthermore, based on uncertain parameters such as
resource content in regolith, the potential performance range of each plant was
discovered through Monte Carlo simulations. The result indicates the benefit of
the series hybrid architecture in terms of regolith excavation rate, while its
mass cost seems the highest among the studied architectures.
