Title: FuXi Weather: A data-to-forecast machine learning system for global
weather
Authors: Xiuyu Sun, Xiaohui Zhong, Xiaoze Xu, Yuanqing Huang, Hao Li, J. David
Neelin, Deliang Chen, Jie Feng, Wei Han, Libo Wu, Yuan Qi
ID: 2408.05472
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.05472

Abstract:
Weather forecasting traditionally relies on numerical weather prediction (NWP)
systems that integrates global observational systems, data assimilation (DA),
and forecasting models. Despite steady improvements in forecast accuracy over
recent decades, further advances are increasingly constrained by high
computational costs, the underutilization of vast observational datasets, and
the challenges of obtaining finer resolution. These limitations, alongside the
uneven distribution of observational networks, result in global disparities in
forecast accuracy, leaving some regions vulnerable to extreme weather. Recent
advances in machine learning present a promising alternative, providing more
efficient and accurate forecasts using the same initial conditions as NWP.
However, current machine learning models still depend on the initial conditions
generated by NWP systems, which require extensive computational resources and
expertise. Here we introduce FuXi Weather, a machine learning weather
forecasting system that assimilates data from multiple satellites. Operating on
a 6-hourly DA and forecast cycle, FuXi Weather generates reliable and accurate
10-day global weather forecasts at a spatial resolution of $0.25^\circ$. FuXi
Weather is the first system to achieve all-grid, all-surface, all-channel, and
all-sky DA and forecasting, extending skillful forecast lead times beyond those
of the European Centre for Medium-range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) high-
resolution forecasts (HRES) while using significantly fewer observations. FuXi
Weather consistently outperforms ECMWF HRES in observation-sparse regions, such
as central Africa, demonstrating its potential to improve forecasts where
observational infrastructure is limited.
