Title: Global Lightning-Ignited Wildfires Prediction and Climate Change
Projections based on Explainable Machine Learning Models
Authors: Assaf Shmuel, Teddy Lazebnik, Oren Glickman, Eyal Heifetz, Colin Price
ID: 2409.10046
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.10046

Abstract:
Wildfires pose a significant natural disaster risk to populations and contribute
to accelerated climate change. As wildfires are also affected by climate change,
extreme wildfires are becoming increasingly frequent. Although they occur less
frequently globally than those sparked by human activities, lightning-ignited
wildfires play a substantial role in carbon emissions and account for the
majority of burned areas in certain regions. While existing computational
models, especially those based on machine learning, aim to predict lightning-
ignited wildfires, they are typically tailored to specific regions with unique
characteristics, limiting their global applicability. In this study, we present
machine learning models designed to characterize and predict lightning-ignited
wildfires on a global scale. Our approach involves classifying lightning-ignited
versus anthropogenic wildfires, and estimating with high accuracy the
probability of lightning to ignite a fire based on a wide spectrum of factors
such as meteorological conditions and vegetation. Utilizing these models, we
analyze seasonal and spatial trends in lightning-ignited wildfires shedding
light on the impact of climate change on this phenomenon. We analyze the
influence of various features on the models using eXplainable Artificial
Intelligence (XAI) frameworks. Our findings highlight significant global
differences between anthropogenic and lightning-ignited wildfires. Moreover, we
demonstrate that, even over a short time span of less than a decade, climate
changes have steadily increased the global risk of lightning-ignited wildfires.
This distinction underscores the imperative need for dedicated predictive models
and fire weather indices tailored specifically to each type of wildfire.
