Title: Artificial-Intelligence Generated Code Considered Harmful: A Road Map for
Secure and High-Quality Code Generation
Authors: Chun Jie Chong, Zhihao Yao, Iulian Neamtiu
ID: 2409.19182
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.19182

Abstract:
Generating code via a LLM (rather than writing code from scratch), has exploded
in popularity. However, the security implications of LLM-generated code are
still unknown. We performed a study that compared the security and quality of
human-written code with that of LLM-generated code, for a wide range of
programming tasks, including data structures, algorithms, cryptographic
routines, and LeetCode questions. To assess code security we used unit testing,
fuzzing, and static analysis. For code quality, we focused on complexity and
size. We found that LLM can generate incorrect code that fails to implement the
required functionality, especially for more complicated tasks; such errors can
be subtle. For example, for the cryptographic algorithm SHA1, LLM generated an
incorrect implementation that nevertheless compiles. In cases where its
functionality was correct, we found that LLM-generated code is less secure,
primarily due to the lack of defensive programming constructs, which invites a
host of security issues such as buffer overflows or integer overflows. Fuzzing
has revealed that LLM-generated code is more prone to hangs and crashes than
human-written code. Quality-wise, we found that LLM generates bare-bones code
that lacks defensive programming constructs, and is typically more complex (per
line of code) compared to human-written code. Next, we constructed a feedback
loop that asked the LLM to re-generate the code and eliminate the found issues
(e.g., malloc overflow, array index out of bounds, null dereferences). We found
that the LLM fails to eliminate such issues consistently: while succeeding in
some cases, we found instances where the re-generated, supposedly more secure
code, contains new issues; we also found that upon prompting, LLM can introduce
issues in files that were issues-free before prompting.
