Title: Learning Nudges for Conditional Cooperation: A Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning Model
Authors: Shatayu Kulkarni, Sabine Brunswicker
ID: 2409.09509
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.09509

Abstract:
The public goods game describes a social dilemma in which a large proportion of
agents act as conditional cooperators (CC): they only act cooperatively if they
see others acting cooperatively because they satisfice with the social norm to
be in line with what others are doing instead of optimizing cooperation. CCs are
guided by aspiration-based reinforcement learning guided by past experiences of
interactions with others and satisficing aspirations. In many real-world
settings, reinforcing social norms do not emerge. In this paper, we propose that
an optimizing reinforcement agent can facilitate cooperation through nudges,
i.e. indirect mechanisms for cooperation to happen. The agent's goal is to
motivate CCs into cooperation through its own actions to create social norms
that signal that others are cooperating. We introduce a multi-agent
reinforcement learning model for public goods games, with 3 CC learning agents
using aspirational reinforcement learning and 1 nudging agent using deep
reinforcement learning to learn nudges that optimize cooperation. For our
nudging agent, we model two distinct reward functions, one maximizing the total
game return (sum DRL) and one maximizing the number of cooperative contributions
contributions higher than a proportional threshold (prop DRL). Our results show
that our aspiration-based RL model for CC agents is consistent with empirically
observed CC behavior. Games combining 3 CC RL agents and one nudging RL agent
outperform the baseline consisting of 4 CC RL agents only. The sum DRL nudging
agent increases the total sum of contributions by 8.22% and the total proportion
of cooperative contributions by 12.42%, while the prop nudging DRL increases the
total sum of contributions by 8.85% and the total proportion of cooperative
contributions by 14.87%. Our findings advance the literature on public goods
games and reinforcement learning.
