Title: Generative artificial intelligence usage by researchers at work: Effects
of gender, career stage, type of workplace, and perceived barriers
Authors: Pablo Dorta-González, Alexis Jorge López-Puig, María Isabel Dorta-
González, Sara M. González-Betancor
ID: 2409.14570
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.14570

Abstract:
The integration of generative artificial intelligence technology into research
environments has become increasingly common in recent years, representing a
significant shift in the way researchers approach their work. This paper seeks
to explore the factors underlying the frequency of use of generative AI amongst
researchers in their professional environments. As survey data may be influenced
by a bias towards scientists interested in AI, potentially skewing the results
towards the perspectives of these researchers, this study uses a regression
model to isolate the impact of specific factors such as gender, career stage,
type of workplace, and perceived barriers to using AI technology on the
frequency of use of generative AI. It also controls for other relevant variables
such as direct involvement in AI research or development, collaboration with AI
companies, geographic location, and scientific discipline. Our results show that
researchers who face barriers to AI adoption experience an 11% increase in tool
use, while those who cite insufficient training resources experience an 8%
decrease. Female researchers experience a 7% decrease in AI tool usage compared
to men, while advanced career researchers experience a significant 19% decrease.
Researchers associated with government advisory groups are 45% more likely to
use AI tools frequently than those in government roles. Researchers in for-
profit companies show an increase of 19%, while those in medical research
institutions and hospitals show an increase of 16% and 15%, respectively. This
paper contributes to a deeper understanding of the mechanisms driving the use of
generative AI tools amongst researchers, with valuable implications for both
academia and industry.
