Title: Shaping the Future of Endangered and Low-Resource Languages -- Our Role
in the Age of LLMs: A Keynote at ECIR 2024
Authors: Josiane Mothe
ID: 2409.13702
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.13702

Abstract:
Isidore of Seville is credited with the adage that it is language that gives
birth to a people, and not the other way around , underlining the profound role
played by language in the formation of cultural and social identity. Today, of
the more than 7100 languages listed, a significant number are endangered. Since
the 1970s, linguists, information seekers and enthusiasts have helped develop
digital resources and automatic tools to support a wide range of languages,
including endangered ones. The advent of Large Language Model (LLM) technologies
holds both promise and peril. They offer unprecedented possibilities for the
translation and generation of content and resources, key elements in the
preservation and revitalisation of languages. They also present threat of
homogenisation, cultural oversimplification and the further marginalisation of
already vulnerable languages. The talk this paper is based on has proposed an
initiatory journey, exploring the potential paths and partnerships between
technology and tradition, with a particular focus on the Occitan language.
Occitan is a language from Southern France, parts of Spain and Italy that played
a major cultural and economic role, particularly in the Middle Ages. It is now
endangered according to UNESCO. The talk critically has examined how human
expertise and artificial intelligence can work together to offer hope for
preserving the linguistic diversity that forms the foundation of our global and
especially our European heritage while addressing some of the ethical and
practical challenges that accompany the use of these powerful technologies. This
paper is based on the keynote I gave at the 46th European Conference on
Information Retrieval (ECIR 2024). As an alternative to reading this paper, a
video talk is available online. 1 Date: 26 March 2024.
