Title: The Ability of Large Language Models to Evaluate Constraint-satisfaction
in Agent Responses to Open-ended Requests
Authors: Lior Madmoni, Amir Zait, Ilia Labzovsky, Danny Karmon
ID: 2409.14371
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.14371

Abstract:
Generative AI agents are often expected to respond to complex user requests that
have No One Right Answer (NORA), e.g., "design a vegetarian meal plan below 1800
calories". Such requests may entail a set of constraints that the agent should
adhere to. To successfully develop agents for NORA scenarios, an accurate
automatic evaluation framework is essential, and specifically - one capable of
validating the satisfaction of constraints in the agent's response. Recently,
large language models (LLMs) have been adopted as versatile evaluators for many
NORA tasks, but their ability to evaluate constraint-satisfaction in generated
text remains unclear. To study this, we develop and release a novel Arithmetic
Constraint-Satisfaction (ACS) benchmarking dataset. The dataset consists of
complex user requests with corresponding constraints, agent responses and human
labels indicating each constraint's satisfaction level in the response. A unique
property of this dataset is that validating many of its constraints requires
reviewing the response as a whole (in contrast to many other benchmarks that
require the validation of a single independent item). Moreover, it assesses LLMs
in performing reasoning, in-context data extraction, arithmetic calculations,
and counting. We then benchmark both open and proprietary LLMs on evaluating
constraint-satisfaction, and show that most models still have a significant
headroom for improvement, and that errors primarily stem from reasoning issues.
In addition, most models exhibit a skewed constraint-satisfaction prediction
pattern, with higher accuracy where the ground-truth label is "satisfied".
Lastly, few-shot prompting for our task proved to be rather challenging, since
many of the studied models showed a degradation in performance when it was
introduced.
