Title: Mapping Technical Safety Research at AI Companies: A literature review
and incentives analysis
Authors: Oscar Delaney, Oliver Guest, Zoe Williams
ID: 2409.07878
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.07878

Abstract:
As AI systems become more advanced, concerns about large-scale risks from misuse
or accidents have grown. This report analyzes the technical research into safe
AI development being conducted by three leading AI companies: Anthropic, Google
DeepMind, and OpenAI.
  We define safe AI development as developing AI systems that are unlikely to
pose large-scale misuse or accident risks. This encompasses a range of technical
approaches aimed at ensuring AI systems behave as intended and do not cause
unintended harm, even as they are made more capable and autonomous.
  We analyzed all papers published by the three companies from January 2022 to
July 2024 that were relevant to safe AI development, and categorized the 80
included papers into nine safety approaches. Additionally, we noted two
categories representing nascent approaches explored by academia and civil
society, but not currently represented in any research papers by these leading
AI companies. Our analysis reveals where corporate attention is concentrated and
where potential gaps lie.
  Some AI research may stay unpublished for good reasons, such as to not inform
adversaries about the details of security techniques they would need to overcome
to misuse AI systems. Therefore, we also considered the incentives that AI
companies have to research each approach, regardless of how much work they have
published on the topic.
  We identified three categories where there are currently no or few papers and
where we do not expect AI companies to become much more incentivized to pursue
this research in the future. These are model organisms of misalignment, multi-
agent safety, and safety by design. Our findings provide an indication that
these approaches may be slow to progress without funding or efforts from
government, civil society, philanthropists, or academia.
