Title: Convergence-aware Clustered Federated Graph Learning Framework for
Collaborative Inter-company Labor Market Forecasting
Authors: Zhuoning Guo, Hao Liu, Le Zhang, Qi Zhang, Hengshu Zhu, Hui Xiong
ID: 2409.19545
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.19545

Abstract:
Labor market forecasting on talent demand and supply is essential for business
management and economic development. With accurate and timely forecasts,
employers can adapt their recruitment strategies to align with the evolving
labor market, and employees can have proactive career path planning according to
future demand and supply. However, previous studies ignore the interconnection
between demand-supply sequences among different companies and positions for
predicting variations. Moreover, companies are reluctant to share their private
human resource data for global labor market analysis due to concerns over
jeopardizing competitive advantage, security threats, and potential ethical or
legal violations. To this end, in this paper, we formulate the Federated Labor
Market Forecasting (FedLMF) problem and propose a Meta-personalized Convergence-
aware Clustered Federated Learning (MPCAC-FL) framework to provide accurate and
timely collaborative talent demand and supply prediction in a privacy-preserving
way. First, we design a graph-based sequential model to capture the inherent
correlation between demand and supply sequences and company-position pairs.
Second, we adopt meta-learning techniques to learn effective initial model
parameters that can be shared across companies, allowing personalized models to
be optimized for forecasting company-specific demand and supply, even when
companies have heterogeneous data. Third, we devise a Convergence-aware
Clustering algorithm to dynamically divide companies into groups according to
model similarity and apply federated aggregation in each group. The
heterogeneity can be alleviated for more stable convergence and better
performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MPCAC-FL outperforms
compared baselines on three real-world datasets and achieves over 97% of the
state-of-the-art model, i.e., DH-GEM, without exposing private company data.
