Title: CoDiCast: Conditional Diffusion Model for Global Weather Prediction with
Uncertainty Quantification
Authors: Jimeng Shi, Bowen Jin, Jiawei Han, Sundararaman Gopalakrishnan, Giri
Narasimhan
ID: 2409.05975
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.05975

Abstract:
Accurate weather forecasting is critical for science and society. Yet, existing
methods have not managed to simultaneously have the properties of high accuracy,
low uncertainty, and high computational efficiency. On one hand, to quantify the
uncertainty in weather predictions, the strategy of ensemble forecast (i.e.,
generating a set of diverse predictions) is often employed. However, traditional
ensemble numerical weather prediction (NWP) is computationally intensive. On the
other hand, most existing machine learning-based weather prediction (MLWP)
approaches are efficient and accurate. Nevertheless, they are deterministic and
cannot capture the uncertainty of weather forecasting. In this work, we propose
CoDiCast, a conditional diffusion model to generate accurate global weather
prediction, while achieving uncertainty quantification with ensemble forecasts
and modest computational cost. The key idea is to simulate a conditional version
of the reverse denoising process in diffusion models, which starts from pure
Gaussian noise to generate realistic weather scenarios for a future time point.
Each denoising step is conditioned on observations from the recent past.
Ensemble forecasts are achieved by repeatedly sampling from stochastic Gaussian
noise to represent uncertainty quantification. CoDiCast is trained on a decade
of ERA5 reanalysis data from the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather
Forecasts (ECMWF). Experimental results demonstrate that our approach
outperforms several existing data-driven methods in accuracy. Our conditional
diffusion model, CoDiCast, can generate 6-day global weather forecasts, at
6-hour steps and $5.625^\circ$ latitude-longitude resolution, for over 5
variables, in about 12 minutes on a commodity A100 GPU machine with 80GB memory.
The open-souced code is provided at https://github.com/JimengShi/CoDiCast.
