Title: Enhancing LLM-based Autonomous Driving Agents to Mitigate Perception
Attacks
Authors: Ruoyu Song, Muslum Ozgur Ozmen, Hyungsub Kim, Antonio Bianchi, Z.
Berkay Celik
ID: 2409.14488
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.14488

Abstract:
There is a growing interest in integrating Large Language Models (LLMs) with
autonomous driving (AD) systems. However, AD systems are vulnerable to attacks
against their object detection and tracking (ODT) functions. Unfortunately, our
evaluation of four recent LLM agents against ODT attacks shows that the attacks
are 63.26% successful in causing them to crash or violate traffic rules due to
(1) misleading memory modules that provide past experiences for decision making,
(2) limitations of prompts in identifying inconsistencies, and (3) reliance on
ground truth perception data.
  In this paper, we introduce Hudson, a driving reasoning agent that extends
prior LLM-based driving systems to enable safer decision making during
perception attacks while maintaining effectiveness under benign conditions.
Hudson achieves this by first instrumenting the AD software to collect real-time
perception results and contextual information from the driving scene. This data
is then formalized into a domain-specific language (DSL). To guide the LLM in
detecting and making safe control decisions during ODT attacks, Hudson
translates the DSL into natural language, along with a list of custom attack
detection instructions. Following query execution, Hudson analyzes the LLM's
control decision to understand its causal reasoning process.
  We evaluate the effectiveness of Hudson using a proprietary LLM (GPT-4) and
two open-source LLMs (Llama and Gemma) in various adversarial driving scenarios.
GPT-4, Llama, and Gemma achieve, on average, an attack detection accuracy of 83.
3%, 63. 6%, and 73. 6%. Consequently, they make safe control decisions in 86.4%,
73.9%, and 80% of the attacks. Our results, following the growing interest in
integrating LLMs into AD systems, highlight the strengths of LLMs and their
potential to detect and mitigate ODT attacks.
