Title: Analyzing Recursiveness in Multimodal Generative Artificial Intelligence:
Stability or Divergence?
Authors: Javier Conde, Tobias Cheung, Gonzalo Martínez, Pedro Reviriego, Rik
Sarkar
ID: 2409.16297
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.16297

Abstract:
One of the latest trends in generative Artificial Intelligence is tools that
generate and analyze content in different modalities, such as text and images,
and convert information from one to the other. From a conceptual point of view,
it is interesting to study whether these modality changes incur information loss
and to what extent. This is analogous to variants of the classical game
telephone, where players alternate between describing images and creating
drawings based on those descriptions leading to unexpected transformations of
the original content. In the case of AI, modality changes can be applied
recursively, starting from an image to extract a text that describes it; using
the text to generate a second image, extracting a text that describes it, and so
on. As this process is applied recursively, AI tools are generating content from
one mode to use them to create content in another mode and so on. Ideally, the
embeddings of all of them would remain close to those of the original content so
that only small variations are observed in the generated content versus the
original one. However, it may also be the case the distance to the original
embeddings increases in each iteration leading to a divergence in the process
and to content that is barely related to the original one. In this paper, we
present the results of an empirical study on the impact of recursive modality
changes using GPT-4o, a state-of-the-art AI multimodal tool, and DALL-E 3. The
results show that the multimodality loop diverges from the initial image without
converging to anything specific. We have observed differences depending on the
type of initial image and the configuration of the models. These findings are
particularly relevant due to the increasing use of these tools for content
generation, reconstruction, and adaptation, and their potential implications for
the content on the Internet of the future.
