Title: Unifying the description of hydrocarbons and hydrogenated carbon
materials with a chemically reactive machine learning interatomic potential
Authors: Rina Ibragimova, Mikhail S. Kuklin, Tigany Zarrouk, Miguel A. Caro
ID: 2409.08194
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.08194

Abstract:
We present a general-purpose machine learning (ML) interatomic potential for
carbon and hydrogen which is capable of simulating various materials and
molecules composed of these elements. This ML interatomic potential is trained
using the Gaussian approximation potential (GAP) framework and an extensive
dataset of C-H configurations obtained from density functional theory. The
dataset is constructed through iterative training and structure-search
techniques that generate a broad range of configurations to comprehensively
sample the potential energy surface. Furthermore, the dataset is supplemented
with relevant bulk, molecular, and high-pressure structures. Finally, long-range
van der Waals interactions are added as a locally parametrized model. The
accuracy and generality of the potential are validated through the analysis of
different simulations under a wide range of conditions, including weak
interactions, high temperature, and high pressure. We show that our CH GAP model
describes different problems such as the formation of simple and complex
alkanes, aromatic hydrocarbons, hydrogenated amorphous carbon (a-C:H), and CH
systems at extreme conditions, while retaining good accuracy for pure carbon
materials. We use this model to generate hydrocarbons of different sizes and
complexity without prior knowledge of organic chemistry rules, and to highlight
intrinsic limitations to the simultaneous description on intra and
intermolecular interactions within a single computational framework. Our
general-purpose ML interatomic potential has the capability to significantly
advance research in the field of H-containing carbon materials and compounds,
particularly in the areas where longer dynamics, reactivity and large-scale
effects may be important.
