Title: "Come to us first": Centering Community Organizations in Artificial
Intelligence for Social Good Partnerships
Authors: Hongjin Lin, Naveena Karusala, Chinasa T. Okolo, Catherine D'Ignazio,
Krzysztof Z. Gajos
ID: 2409.06814
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.06814

Abstract:
Artificial Intelligence for Social Good (AI4SG) has emerged as a growing body of
research and practice exploring the potential of AI technologies to tackle
social issues. This area emphasizes interdisciplinary partnerships with
community organizations, such as non-profits and government agencies. However,
amidst excitement about new advances in AI and their potential impact, the
needs, expectations, and aspirations of these community organizations--and
whether they are being met--are not well understood. Understanding these factors
is important to ensure that the considerable efforts by AI teams and community
organizations can actually achieve the positive social impact they strive for.
Drawing on the Data Feminism framework, we explored the perspectives of
community organization members on their partnerships with AI teams through 16
semi-structured interviews. Our study highlights the pervasive influence of
funding agendas and the optimism surrounding AI's potential. Despite the
significant intellectual contributions and labor provided by community
organization members, their goals were frequently sidelined in favor of other
stakeholders, including AI teams. While many community organization members
expected tangible project deployment, only two out of 14 projects we studied
reached the deployment stage. However, community organization members sustained
their belief in the potential of the projects, still seeing diminished goals as
valuable. To enhance the efficacy of future collaborations, our participants
shared their aspirations for success, calling for co-leadership starting from
the early stages of projects. We propose data co-liberation as a grounding
principle for approaching AI4SG moving forward, positing that community
organizations' co-leadership is essential for fostering more effective,
sustainable, and ethical development of AI.
