Title: Unified Neural Network Scaling Laws and Scale-time Equivalence
Authors: Akhilan Boopathy, Ila Fiete
ID: 2409.05782
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.05782

Abstract:
As neural networks continue to grow in size but datasets might not, it is vital
to understand how much performance improvement can be expected: is it more
important to scale network size or data volume? Thus, neural network scaling
laws, which characterize how test error varies with network size and data
volume, have become increasingly important. However, existing scaling laws are
often applicable only in limited regimes and often do not incorporate or predict
well-known phenomena such as double descent. Here, we present a novel
theoretical characterization of how three factors -- model size, training time,
and data volume -- interact to determine the performance of deep neural
networks. We first establish a theoretical and empirical equivalence between
scaling the size of a neural network and increasing its training time
proportionally. Scale-time equivalence challenges the current practice, wherein
large models are trained for small durations, and suggests that smaller models
trained over extended periods could match their efficacy. It also leads to a
novel method for predicting the performance of large-scale networks from small-
scale networks trained for extended epochs, and vice versa. We next combine
scale-time equivalence with a linear model analysis of double descent to obtain
a unified theoretical scaling law, which we confirm with experiments across
vision benchmarks and network architectures. These laws explain several
previously unexplained phenomena: reduced data requirements for generalization
in larger models, heightened sensitivity to label noise in overparameterized
models, and instances where increasing model scale does not necessarily enhance
performance. Our findings hold significant implications for the practical
deployment of neural networks, offering a more accessible and efficient path to
training and fine-tuning large models.
