Title: Coupled-Cluster Calculations of Infinite Nuclear Matter in the Complete
Basis Limit Using Bayesian Machine Learning
Authors: Julie Butler, Morten Hjorth-Jensen, Gustav R. Jansen
ID: 2409.18234
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.18234

Abstract:
Infinite nuclear matter provides valuable insights into the behavior of nuclear
systems and aids our understanding of atomic nuclei and large-scale stellar
objects such as neutron stars. However, partly due to the large basis needed to
converge the system's binding energy, size-extensive methods such as coupled-
cluster theory struggle with long computational run times, even using the
nation's largest high-performance computing facilities. This research introduces
a novel approach to the problem. We propose using a machine learning method to
predict the coupled-cluster energies of infinite matter systems in the complete
basis limit, leveraging only data collected using smaller basis sets. This
method promises to deliver high-accuracy results with significantly reduced run
times. The sequential regression extrapolation (SRE) algorithm, based on
Gaussian processes, was created to perform these extrapolations. By combining
Bayesian machine learning with a unique method of formatting the training data,
we can create a powerful extrapolator that can make accurate predictions given
very little data. The SRE algorithm successfully predicted the CCD(T) energies
for pure neutron matter across six densities near nuclear saturation density,
with an average error of 0.0083 MeV/N. The algorithm achieved an average error
of 0.038 MeV/A for symmetric nuclear matter. These predictions were made with a
time savings of 83.8 node hours for pure neutron matter and 284 node hours for
symmetric nuclear matter. Additionally, the symmetry energy at these six
densities was predicted with an average error of 0.031 MeV/A and a total time
savings of 368 node hours compared to the traditional converged coupled-cluster
calculations performed without the SRE algorithm.
