Title: Early Detection of Coronary Heart Disease Using Hybrid Quantum Machine
Learning Approach
Authors: Mehroush Banday, Sherin Zafar, Parul Agarwal, M Afshar Alam, Abubeker K
M
ID: 2409.10932
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.10932

Abstract:
Coronary heart disease (CHD) is a severe cardiac disease, and hence, its early
diagnosis is essential as it improves treatment results and saves money on
medical care. The prevailing development of quantum computing and machine
learning (ML) technologies may bring practical improvement to the performance of
CHD diagnosis. Quantum machine learning (QML) is receiving tremendous interest
in various disciplines due to its higher performance and capabilities. A quantum
leap in the healthcare industry will increase processing power and optimise
multiple models. Techniques for QML have the potential to forecast cardiac
disease and help in early detection. To predict the risk of coronary heart
disease, a hybrid approach utilizing an ensemble machine learning model based on
QML classifiers is presented in this paper. Our approach, with its unique
ability to address multidimensional healthcare data, reassures the method's
robustness by fusing quantum and classical ML algorithms in a multi-step
inferential framework. The marked rise in heart disease and death rates impacts
worldwide human health and the global economy. Reducing cardiac morbidity and
mortality requires early detection of heart disease. In this research, a hybrid
approach utilizes techniques with quantum computing capabilities to tackle
complex problems that are not amenable to conventional machine learning
algorithms and to minimize computational expenses. The proposed method has been
developed in the Raspberry Pi 5 Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) platform and
tested on a broad dataset that integrates clinical and imaging data from
patients suffering from CHD and healthy controls. Compared to classical machine
learning models, the accuracy, sensitivity, F1 score, and specificity of the
proposed hybrid QML model used with CHD are manifold higher.
