Title: AlphaTrans: A Neuro-Symbolic Compositional Approach for Repository-Level
Code Translation and Validation
Authors: Ali Reza Ibrahimzada, Kaiyao Ke, Mrigank Pawagi, Muhammad Salman Abid,
Rangeet Pan, Saurabh Sinha, Reyhaneh Jabbarvand
ID: 2410.24117
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.24117

Abstract:
Code translation transforms programs from one programming language (PL) to
another. Several rule-based transpilers have been designed to automate code
translation between different pairs of PLs. However, the rules can become
obsolete as the PLs evolve and cannot generalize to other PLs. Recent studies
have explored the automation of code translation using Large Language Models
(LLMs). One key observation is that such techniques may work well for crafted
benchmarks but fail to generalize to the scale and complexity of real-world
projects with dependencies, custom types, PL-specific features, etc. We propose
AlphaTrans, a neuro-symbolic approach to automate repository-level code
translation. AlphaTrans translates both source and test code, and employs
multiple levels of validation to ensure the translation preserves the
functionality of the source program. To break down the problem for LLMs,
AlphaTrans leverages program analysis to decompose the program into fragments
and translates them in the reverse call order. We leveraged AlphaTrans to
translate ten real-world open-source projects consisting of <836, 8575, 2719>
classes, methods, and tests. AlphaTrans breaks down these projects into 17874
fragments and translates the entire repository. 96.40% of the translated
fragments are syntactically correct, and AlphaTrans validates the translations'
runtime behavior and functional correctness for 27.03% and 25.14% of fragments.
On average, the integrated translation and validation take 34 hours to translate
a project, showing its scalability in practice. For the incorrect translations,
AlphaTrans generates a report including existing translation, stack trace, test
errors, or assertion failures. We provided these artifacts to two developers to
fix the translation bugs in four projects. They were able to fix the issues in
20.1 hours on average and achieve all passing tests.
