Title: Understanding the First Wave of AI Safety Institutes: Characteristics,
Functions, and Challenges
Authors: Renan Araujo, Kristina Fort, Oliver Guest
ID: 2410.09219
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.09219

Abstract:
In November 2023, the UK and US announced the creation of their AI Safety
Institutes (AISIs). Five other jurisdictions have followed in establishing AISIs
or similar institutions, with more likely to follow. While there is considerable
variation between these institutions, there are also key similarities worth
identifying.
  This primer describes one cluster of similar AISIs, the "first wave,"
consisting of the Japan, UK, and US AISIs. First-wave AISIs have several
fundamental characteristics in common: they are technical government
institutions, have a clear mandate related to the safety of advanced AI systems,
and lack regulatory powers.
  Safety evaluations are at the center of first-wave AISIs. These techniques
test AI systems across tasks to understand their behavior and capabilities on
relevant risks, such as cyber, chemical, and biological misuse. They also share
three core functions: research, standards, and cooperation. These functions are
critical to AISIs' work on safety evaluations but also support other activities
such as scientific consensus-building and foundational AI safety research.
  Despite its growing popularity as an institutional model, the AISI model is
not free from challenges and limitations. Some analysts have criticized the
first wave of AISIs for specializing too much in a sub-area and for being
potentially redundant with existing institutions, for example.
  Future developments may rapidly change this landscape, and particularities of
individual AISIs may not be captured by our broad-strokes description. This
policy brief aims to outline the core elements of first-wave AISIs as a way of
encouraging and improving conversations on this novel institutional model,
acknowledging this is just a simplified snapshot rather than a timeless
prescription.
