Title: AI, Climate, and Regulation: From Data Centers to the AI Act
Authors: Kai Ebert, Nicolas Alder, Ralf Herbrich, Philipp Hacker
ID: 2410.06681
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.06681

Abstract:
We live in a world that is experiencing an unprecedented boom of AI applications
that increasingly penetrate and enhance all sectors of private and public life,
from education, media, medicine, and mobility to the industrial and professional
workspace, and -- potentially particularly consequentially -- robotics. As this
world is simultaneously grappling with climate change, the climate and
environmental implications of the development and use of AI have become an
important subject of public and academic debate. In this paper, we aim to
provide guidance on the climate-related regulation for data centers and AI
specifically, and discuss how to operationalize these requirements. We also
highlight challenges and room for improvement, and make a number of policy
proposals to this end. In particular, we propose a specific interpretation of
the AI Act to bring reporting on the previously unadressed energy consumption
from AI inferences back into the scope. We also find that the AI Act fails to
address indirect greenhouse gas emissions from AI applications. Furthermore, for
the purpose of energy consumption reporting, we compare levels of measurement
within data centers and recommend measurement at the cumulative server level. We
also argue for an interpretation of the AI Act that includes environmental
concerns in the mandatory risk assessment (sustainability risk assessment, SIA),
and provide guidance on its operationalization. The EU data center regulation
proves to be a good first step but requires further development by including
binding renewable energy and efficiency targets for data centers. Overall, we
make twelve concrete policy proposals, in four main areas: Energy and
Environmental Reporting Obligations; Legal and Regulatory Clarifications;
Transparency and Accountability Mechanisms; and Future Far-Reaching Measures
beyond Transparency.
