Title: Identifying Money Laundering Subgraphs on the Blockchain
Authors: Kiwhan Song, Mohamed Ali Dhraief, Muhua Xu, Locke Cai, Xuhao Chen,
Arvind, Jie Chen
ID: 2410.08394
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.08394

Abstract:
Anti-Money Laundering (AML) involves the identification of money laundering
crimes in financial activities, such as cryptocurrency transactions. Recent
studies advanced AML through the lens of graph-based machine learning, modeling
the web of financial transactions as a graph and developing graph methods to
identify suspicious activities. For instance, a recent effort on opensourcing
datasets and benchmarks, Elliptic2, treats a set of Bitcoin addresses,
considered to be controlled by the same entity, as a graph node and transactions
among entities as graph edges. This modeling reveals the "shape" of a money
laundering scheme - a subgraph on the blockchain. Despite the attractive
subgraph classification results benchmarked by the paper, competitive methods
remain expensive to apply due to the massive size of the graph; moreover,
existing methods require candidate subgraphs as inputs which may not be
available in practice. In this work, we introduce RevTrack, a graph-based
framework that enables large-scale AML analysis with a lower cost and a higher
accuracy. The key idea is to track the initial senders and the final receivers
of funds; these entities offer a strong indication of the nature (licit vs.
suspicious) of their respective subgraph. Based on this framework, we propose
RevClassify, which is a neural network model for subgraph classification.
Additionally, we address the practical problem where subgraph candidates are not
given, by proposing RevFilter. This method identifies new suspicious subgraphs
by iteratively filtering licit transactions, using RevClassify. Benchmarking
these methods on Elliptic2, a new standard for AML, we show that RevClassify
outperforms state-of-the-art subgraph classification techniques in both cost and
accuracy. Furthermore, we demonstrate the effectiveness of RevFilter in
discovering new suspicious subgraphs, confirming its utility for practical AML.
