Title: Permutation Entropy for the Characterization of the Attractive
Hamiltonian Mean-Field Model
Authors: Melissa Fuentealba, Danilo M. Rivera, Roberto E. Navarro
ID: 2410.19013
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.19013

Abstract:
The Hamiltonian Mean-Field (HMF) model is a long-range interaction model that
exhibits quasi-stationary states associated with a phase transition. Its quasi-
stationary states with a lifetime diverging with the number of particles in the
system. These states are characterized by homogeneous or non-homogeneous
structures in phase-space. There exists a phase-transition between these states
that have been traditionally characterized by the their mean magnetization.
However, the magnetization also exhibits fluctuations in time around its mean
value, that can be an indicator of the kind of quasi-stationary state. Thus, we
want to characterize the quasi-stationary states of the HMF model through the
time-series of the magnetization and its fluctuations through a measure of
information, i.e. the permutation entropy and the complexity-entropy plane.
Permutation entropy is a measure for characterizing chaotic time series,
especially in the presence of dynamic and observational noise, as it is
computationally and conceptually simple. For non-homogeneous states, the
permutation entropy shows that the HMF model tends towards order, while the
magnetizacion fluctuations reveal reduced structures in time. On the contrary,
homogeneous states tend to disorder and the structures of the magnetization
fluctuations increase as the initial magnetization is larger. In all the study
cases of this thesis, the HMF model is characterized by low entropy values but
the highest possible complexity value. Thus, the HMF model can be described as a
chaotic, deterministic and intermitent system. This aligns with previous studies
of the model in the phase space. The results demonstrate that the HMF model can
be understood and interpreted from the fluctuations of magnetization using
permutation entropy and the complexity-entropy plane.
