Title: UniCoN: Universal Conditional Networks for Multi-Age Embryonic Cartilage
Segmentation with Sparsely Annotated Data
Authors: Nishchal Sapkota, Yejia Zhang, Zihao Zhao, Maria Gomez, Yuhan Hsi,
Jordan A. Wilson, Kazuhiko Kawasaki, Greg Holmes, Meng Wu, Ethylin Wang Jabs,
Joan T. Richtsmeier, Susan M. Motch Perrine, Danny Z. Chen
ID: 2410.13043
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.13043

Abstract:
Osteochondrodysplasia, affecting 2-3% of newborns globally, is a group of bone
and cartilage disorders that often result in head malformations, contributing to
childhood morbidity and reduced quality of life. Current research on this
disease using mouse models faces challenges since it involves accurately
segmenting the developing cartilage in 3D micro-CT images of embryonic mice.
Tackling this segmentation task with deep learning (DL) methods is laborious due
to the big burden of manual image annotation, expensive due to the high
acquisition costs of 3D micro-CT images, and difficult due to embryonic
cartilage's complex and rapidly changing shapes. While DL approaches have been
proposed to automate cartilage segmentation, most such models have limited
accuracy and generalizability, especially across data from different embryonic
age groups. To address these limitations, we propose novel DL methods that can
be adopted by any DL architectures -- including CNNs, Transformers, or hybrid
models -- which effectively leverage age and spatial information to enhance
model performance. Specifically, we propose two new mechanisms, one conditioned
on discrete age categories and the other on continuous image crop locations, to
enable an accurate representation of cartilage shape changes across ages and
local shape details throughout the cranial region. Extensive experiments on
multi-age cartilage segmentation datasets show significant and consistent
performance improvements when integrating our conditional modules into popular
DL segmentation architectures. On average, we achieve a 1.7% Dice score increase
with minimal computational overhead and a 7.5% improvement on unseen data. These
results highlight the potential of our approach for developing robust, universal
models capable of handling diverse datasets with limited annotated data, a key
challenge in DL-based medical image analysis.
