Title: Generalization emerges from local optimization in a self-organized
learning network
Authors: S. Barland, L. Gil
ID: 2410.02590
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.02590

Abstract:
We design and analyze a new paradigm for building supervised learning networks,
driven only by local optimization rules without relying on a global error
function. Traditional neural networks with a fixed topology are made up of
identical nodes and derive their expressiveness from an appropriate adjustment
of connection weights. In contrast, our network stores new knowledge in the
nodes accurately and instantaneously, in the form of a lookup table. Only then
is some of this information structured and incorporated into the network
geometry. The training error is initially zero by construction and remains so
throughout the network topology transformation phase. The latter involves a
small number of local topological transformations, such as splitting or merging
of nodes and adding binary connections between them. The choice of operations to
be carried out is only driven by optimization of expressivity at the local
scale. What we are primarily looking for in a learning network is its ability to
generalize, i.e. its capacity to correctly answer questions for which it has
never learned the answers. We show on numerous examples of classification tasks
that the networks generated by our algorithm systematically reach such a state
of perfect generalization when the number of learned examples becomes
sufficiently large. We report on the dynamics of the change of state and show
that it is abrupt and has the distinctive characteristics of a first order phase
transition, a phenomenon already observed for traditional learning networks and
known as grokking. In addition to proposing a non-potential approach for the
construction of learning networks, our algorithm makes it possible to rethink
the grokking transition in a new light, under which acquisition of training data
and topological structuring of data are completely decoupled phenomena.
