Title: OmniGenBench: Automating Large-scale in-silico Benchmarking for Genomic
Foundation Models
Authors: Heng Yang, Jack Cole, Ke Li
ID: 2410.01784
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.01784

Abstract:
The advancements in artificial intelligence in recent years, such as Large
Language Models (LLMs), have fueled expectations for breakthroughs in genomic
foundation models (GFMs). The code of nature, hidden in diverse genomes since
the very beginning of life's evolution, holds immense potential for impacting
humans and ecosystems through genome modeling. Recent breakthroughs in GFMs,
such as Evo, have attracted significant investment and attention to genomic
modeling, as they address long-standing challenges and transform in-silico
genomic studies into automated, reliable, and efficient paradigms. In the
context of this flourishing era of consecutive technological revolutions in
genomics, GFM studies face two major challenges: the lack of GFM benchmarking
tools and the absence of open-source software for diverse genomics. These
challenges hinder the rapid evolution of GFMs and their wide application in
tasks such as understanding and synthesizing genomes, problems that have
persisted for decades. To address these challenges, we introduce GFMBench, a
framework dedicated to GFM-oriented benchmarking. GFMBench standardizes
benchmark suites and automates benchmarking for a wide range of open-source
GFMs. It integrates millions of genomic sequences across hundreds of genomic
tasks from four large-scale benchmarks, democratizing GFMs for a wide range of
in-silico genomic applications. Additionally, GFMBench is released as open-
source software, offering user-friendly interfaces and diverse tutorials,
applicable for AutoBench and complex tasks like RNA design and structure
prediction. To facilitate further advancements in genome modeling, we have
launched a public leaderboard showcasing the benchmark performance derived from
AutoBench. GFMBench represents a step toward standardizing GFM benchmarking and
democratizing GFM applications.
