Title: LADEV: A Language-Driven Testing and Evaluation Platform for Vision-
Language-Action Models in Robotic Manipulation
Authors: Zhijie Wang, Zhehua Zhou, Jiayang Song, Yuheng Huang, Zhan Shu, Lei Ma
ID: 2410.05191
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.05191

Abstract:
Building on the advancements of Large Language Models (LLMs) and Vision Language
Models (VLMs), recent research has introduced Vision-Language-Action (VLA)
models as an integrated solution for robotic manipulation tasks. These models
take camera images and natural language task instructions as input and directly
generate control actions for robots to perform specified tasks, greatly
improving both decision-making capabilities and interaction with human users.
However, the data-driven nature of VLA models, combined with their lack of
interpretability, makes the assurance of their effectiveness and robustness a
challenging task. This highlights the need for a reliable testing and evaluation
platform. For this purpose, in this work, we propose LADEV, a comprehensive and
efficient platform specifically designed for evaluating VLA models. We first
present a language-driven approach that automatically generates simulation
environments from natural language inputs, mitigating the need for manual
adjustments and significantly improving testing efficiency. Then, to further
assess the influence of language input on the VLA models, we implement a
paraphrase mechanism that produces diverse natural language task instructions
for testing. Finally, to expedite the evaluation process, we introduce a batch-
style method for conducting large-scale testing of VLA models. Using LADEV, we
conducted experiments on several state-of-the-art VLA models, demonstrating its
effectiveness as a tool for evaluating these models. Our results showed that
LADEV not only enhances testing efficiency but also establishes a solid baseline
for evaluating VLA models, paving the way for the development of more
intelligent and advanced robotic systems.
