Title: Finding Safety Violations of AI-Enabled Control Systems through the Lens
of Synthesized Proxy Programs
Authors: Jieke Shi, Zhou Yang, Junda He, Bowen Xu, Dongsun Kim, DongGyun Han,
David Lo
ID: 2410.04986
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.04986

Abstract:
Given the increasing adoption of modern AI-enabled control systems, ensuring
their safety and reliability has become a critical task in software testing. One
prevalent approach to testing control systems is falsification, which aims to
find an input signal that causes the control system to violate a formal safety
specification using optimization algorithms. However, applying falsification to
AI-enabled control systems poses two significant challenges: (1)~it requires the
system to execute numerous candidate test inputs, which can be time-consuming,
particularly for systems with AI models that have many parameters, and
(2)~multiple safety requirements are typically defined as a conjunctive
specification, which is difficult for existing falsification approaches to
comprehensively cover.
  This paper introduces Synthify, a falsification framework tailored for AI-
enabled control systems. Our approach performs falsification in a two-phase
process. At the start, Synthify synthesizes a program that implements one or a
few linear controllers to serve as a proxy for the AI controller. This proxy
program mimics the AI controller's functionality but is computationally more
efficient. Then, Synthify employs the $ε$-greedy strategy to sample a promising
sub-specification from the conjunctive safety specification. It then uses a
Simulated Annealing-based falsification algorithm to find violations of the
sampled sub-specification for the control system. To evaluate Synthify, we
compare it to PSY-TaLiRo, a state-of-the-art and industrial-strength
falsification tool, on 8 publicly available control systems. On average,
Synthify achieves a 83.5% higher success rate in falsification compared to PSY-
TaLiRo with the same budget of falsification trials. The safety violations found
by Synthify are also more diverse than those found by PSY-TaLiRo, covering
137.7% more sub-specifications.
