Title: CoHRT: A Collaboration System for Human-Robot Teamwork
Authors: Sujan Sarker, Haley N. Green, Mohammad Samin Yasar, Tariq Iqbal
ID: 2410.08504
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.08504

Abstract:
Collaborative robots are increasingly deployed alongside humans in factories,
hospitals, schools, and other domains to enhance teamwork and efficiency.
Systems that seamlessly integrate humans and robots into cohesive teams for
coordinated and efficient task execution are needed, enabling studies on how
robot collaboration policies affect team performance and teammates' perceived
fairness, trust, and safety. Such a system can also be utilized to study the
impact of a robot's normative behavior on team collaboration. Additionally, it
allows for investigation into how the legibility and predictability of robot
actions affect human-robot teamwork and perceived safety and trust. Existing
systems are limited, typically involving one human and one robot, and thus
require more insight into broader team dynamics. Many rely on games or virtual
simulations, neglecting the impact of a robot's physical presence. Most tasks
are turn-based, hindering simultaneous execution and affecting efficiency. This
paper introduces CoHRT (Collaboration System for Human-Robot Teamwork), which
facilitates multi-human-robot teamwork through seamless collaboration,
coordination, and communication. CoHRT utilizes a server-client-based
architecture, a vision-based system to track task environments, and a simple
interface for team action coordination. It allows for the design of tasks
considering the human teammates' physical and mental workload and varied skill
labels across the team members. We used CoHRT to design a collaborative block
manipulation and jigsaw puzzle-solving task in a team of one Franka Emika Panda
robot and two humans. The system enables recording multi-modal collaboration
data to develop adaptive collaboration policies for robots. To further utilize
CoHRT, we outline potential research directions in diverse human-robot
collaborative tasks.
