Title: Securing HHL Quantum Algorithm against Quantum Computer Attacks
Authors: Yizhuo Tan, Hrvoje Kukina, Jakub Szefer
ID: 2410.08010
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.08010

Abstract:
As the quantum research community expands and new quantum algorithms are created
and implemented, it is essential to consider the security implications and
potential threats that could lead to the compromise the information processed by
them. This work focuses on securing the HHL quantum algorithm against attacks
while it executes on a quantum computer. Specifically, two types of potential
attacks could be deployed on a cloud-based quantum computer by an attacker
circuit attempting to interfere with the victim HHL circuit: the Improper
Initialization Attack (IIA) and the Higher Energy Attack (HEA). To protect the
HHL algorithm from IIA and HEA, this work proposes first-of-a-kind defense
strategies against these attacks on the HHL quantum algorithm. Next, this work
demonstrates an implementation of a new quantum circuit for the HHL quantum
algorithm that incorporates these defenses. The redesigned quantum circuit is
necessary to successfully apply and realize all proposed defense strategies.
Finally, this work illustrates how these defense strategies function in practice
in the redesigned circuit, specifically how they can protect the HHL quantum
algorithm from both IIA and HEA across multiple qubits involving all three types
of qubits used in the HHL algorithms: ancilla, clock, and b. The defense
requires minimal modification to the circuit, and has only a very small effect
on the fidelity of the circuits. The circuits have been tested and validated in
both simulation, and also on real IBM quantum computer hardware. The work
further analyzes how the modified HHL circuit with the defenses is affected by
noise during quantum computation. This work in the end demonstrates that it is
practical to add protections to quantum circuits so that they not only perform
correct computation, but also self-detect if an attack has occured during the
execution.
