Title: Centaur: a foundation model of human cognition
Authors: Marcel Binz, Elif Akata, Matthias Bethge, Franziska Brändle, Fred
Callaway, Julian Coda-Forno, Peter Dayan, Can Demircan, Maria K. Eckstein, Noémi
Éltető, Thomas L. Griffiths, Susanne Haridi, Akshay K. Jagadish, Li Ji-An,
Alexander Kipnis, Sreejan Kumar, Tobias Ludwig, Marvin Mathony, Marcelo Mattar,
Alireza Modirshanechi, Surabhi S. Nath, Joshua C. Peterson, Milena Rmus, Evan M.
Russek, Tankred Saanum, Johannes A. Schubert, Luca M. Schulze Buschoff, Nishad
Singhi, Xin Sui, Mirko Thalmann, Fabian Theis, Vuong Truong, Vishaal Udandarao,
Konstantinos Voudouris, Robert Wilson, Kristin Witte, Shuchen Wu, Dirk Wulff,
Huadong Xiong, Eric Schulz
ID: 2410.20268
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.20268

Abstract:
Establishing a unified theory of cognition has been a major goal of psychology.
While there have been previous attempts to instantiate such theories by building
computational models, we currently do not have one model that captures the human
mind in its entirety. A first step in this direction is to create a model that
can predict human behavior in a wide range of settings. Here we introduce
Centaur, a computational model that can predict and simulate human behavior in
any experiment expressible in natural language. We derived Centaur by finetuning
a state-of-the-art language model on a novel, large-scale data set called
Psych-101. Psych-101 reaches an unprecedented scale, covering trial-by-trial
data from over 60,000 participants performing over 10,000,000 choices in 160
experiments. Centaur not only captures the behavior of held-out participants
better than existing cognitive models, but also generalizes to new cover
stories, structural task modifications, and entirely new domains. Furthermore,
we find that the model's internal representations become more aligned with human
neural activity after finetuning. Taken together, our results demonstrate that
it is possible to discover computational models that capture human behavior
across a wide range of domains. We believe that such models provide tremendous
potential for guiding the development of cognitive theories and present a case
study to demonstrate this.
