Title: Continual Learning with Neuromorphic Computing: Foundations, Methods, and
Emerging Applications
Authors: Mishal Fatima Minhas, Rachmad Vidya Wicaksana Putra, Falah Awwad, Osman
Hasan, Muhammad Shafique
ID: 2410.09218
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.09218

Abstract:
The challenging deployment of compute- and memory-intensive methods from Deep
Neural Network (DNN)-based Continual Learning (CL) underscores the critical need
for a paradigm shift towards more efficient approaches. Neuromorphic Continual
Learning (NCL) appears as an emerging solution, by leveraging the principles of
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) which enable efficient CL algorithms executed in
dynamically-changed environments with resource-constrained computing systems.
Motivated by the need for a holistic study of NCL, in this survey, we first
provide a detailed background on CL, encompassing the desiderata, settings,
metrics, scenario taxonomy, Online Continual Learning (OCL) paradigm, recent
DNN-based methods to address catastrophic forgetting (CF). Then, we analyze
these methods considering CL desiderata, computational and memory costs, as well
as network complexity, hence emphasizing the need for energy-efficient CL.
Afterward, we provide background of low-power neuromorphic systems including
encoding techniques, neuronal dynamics, network architectures, learning rules,
hardware processors, software and hardware frameworks, datasets, benchmarks, and
evaluation metrics. Then, this survey comprehensively reviews and analyzes
state-of-the-art in NCL. The key ideas, implementation frameworks, and
performance assessments are also provided. This survey covers several hybrid
approaches that combine supervised and unsupervised learning paradigms. It also
covers optimization techniques including SNN operations reduction, weight
quantization, and knowledge distillation. Then, this survey discusses the
progress of real-world NCL applications. Finally, this paper provides a future
perspective on the open research challenges for NCL, since the purpose of this
study is to be useful for the wider neuromorphic AI research community and to
inspire future research in bio-plausible OCL.
