Title: Can Artificial Intelligence Generate Quality Research Topics Reflecting
Patient Concerns?
Authors: Jiyeong Kim, Michael L. Chen, Shawheen J. Rezaei, Mariana Ramirez-
Posada, Jennifer L. Caswell-Jin, Allison W. Kurian, Fauzia Riaz, Kavita Y.
Sarin, Jean Y. Tang, Steven M. Asch, Eleni Linos
ID: 2411.14456
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.14456

Abstract:
Patient-centered research is increasingly important in narrowing the gap between
research and patient care, yet incorporating patient perspectives into health
research has been inconsistent. We propose an automated framework leveraging
innovative natural language processing (NLP) and artificial intelligence (AI)
with patient portal messages to generate research ideas that prioritize
important patient issues. We further quantified the quality of AI-generated
research topics. To define patient clinical concerns, we analyzed 614,464
patient messages from 25,549 individuals with breast or skin cancer obtained
from a large academic hospital (2013 to 2024), constructing a 2-staged
unsupervised NLP topic model. Then, we generated research topics to resolve the
defined issues using a widely used AI (ChatGPT-4o, OpenAI Inc, April 2024
version) with prompt-engineering strategies. We guided AI to perform multi-level
tasks: 1) knowledge interpretation and summarization (e.g., interpreting and
summarizing the NLP-defined topics), 2) knowledge generation (e.g., generating
research ideas corresponding to patients issues), 3) self-reflection and
correction (e.g., ensuring and revising the research ideas after searching for
scientific articles), and 4) self-reassurance (e.g., confirming and finalizing
the research ideas). Six highly experienced breast oncologists and
dermatologists assessed the significance and novelty of AI-generated research
topics using a 5-point Likert scale (1-exceptional, 5-poor). One-third of the
AI-suggested research topics were highly significant and novel when both scores
were lower than the average. Two-thirds of the AI-suggested topics were novel in
both cancers. Our findings demonstrate that AI-generated research topics
reflecting patient perspectives via a large volume of patient messages can
meaningfully guide future directions in patient-centered health research.
