Title: Scaling Laws for Online Advertisement Retrieval
Authors: Yunli Wang, Zhen Zhang, Zixuan Yang, Tianyu Xu, Zhiqiang Wang, Yu Li,
Rufan Zhou, Zhiqiang Liu, Yanjie Zhu, Jian Yang, Shiyang Wen, Peng Jiang
ID: 2411.13322
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.13322

Abstract:
The scaling law is a notable property of neural network models and has
significantly propelled the development of large language models. Scaling laws
hold great promise in guiding model design and resource allocation. Recent
research increasingly shows that scaling laws are not limited to NLP tasks or
Transformer architectures; they also apply to domains such as recommendation.
However, there is still a lack of literature on scaling law research in online
advertisement retrieval systems. This may be because 1) identifying the scaling
law for resource cost and online revenue is often expensive in both time and
training resources for industrial applications, and 2) varying settings for
different systems prevent the scaling law from being applied across various
scenarios. To address these issues, we propose a lightweight paradigm to
identify online scaling laws of retrieval models, incorporating a novel offline
metric and an offline simulation algorithm. We prove that under mild
assumptions, the correlation between the novel metric and online revenue
asymptotically approaches 1 and empirically validates its effectiveness. The
simulation algorithm can estimate the machine cost offline. Based on the
lightweight paradigm, we can identify online scaling laws for retrieval models
almost exclusively through offline experiments, and quickly estimate machine
costs and revenues for given model configurations. We further validate the
existence of scaling laws across mainstream model architectures (e.g.,
Transformer, MLP, and DSSM) in our real-world advertising system. With the
identified scaling laws, we demonstrate practical applications for ROI-
constrained model designing and multi-scenario resource allocation in the online
advertising system. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to
study identification and application of online scaling laws for online
advertisement retrieval.
