Title: Generative Artificial Intelligence Meets Synthetic Aperture Radar: A
Survey
Authors: Zhongling Huang, Xidan Zhang, Zuqian Tang, Feng Xu, Mihai Datcu, Junwei
Han
ID: 2411.05027
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.05027

Abstract:
SAR images possess unique attributes that present challenges for both human
observers and vision AI models to interpret, owing to their electromagnetic
characteristics. The interpretation of SAR images encounters various hurdles,
with one of the primary obstacles being the data itself, which includes issues
related to both the quantity and quality of the data. The challenges can be
addressed using generative AI technologies. Generative AI, often known as GenAI,
is a very advanced and powerful technology in the field of artificial
intelligence that has gained significant attention. The advancement has created
possibilities for the creation of texts, photorealistic pictures, videos, and
material in various modalities. This paper aims to comprehensively investigate
the intersection of GenAI and SAR. First, we illustrate the common data
generation-based applications in SAR field and compare them with computer vision
tasks, analyzing the similarity, difference, and general challenges of them.
Then, an overview of the latest GenAI models is systematically reviewed,
including various basic models and their variations targeting the general
challenges. Additionally, the corresponding applications in SAR domain are also
included. Specifically, we propose to summarize the physical model based
simulation approaches for SAR, and analyze the hybrid modeling methods that
combine the GenAI and interpretable models. The evaluation methods that have
been or could be applied to SAR, are also explored. Finally, the potential
challenges and future prospects are discussed. To our best knowledge, this
survey is the first exhaustive examination of the interdiscipline of SAR and
GenAI, encompassing a wide range of topics, including deep neural networks,
physical models, computer vision, and SAR images. The resources of this survey
are open-source at \url{https://github.com/XAI4SAR/GenAIxSAR}.
