Title: Developing a Foundation Model for Predicting Material Failure
Authors: Agnese Marcato, Javier E. Santos, Aleksandra Pachalieva, Kai Gao, Ryley
Hill, Esteban Rougier, Qinjun Kang, Jeffrey Hyman, Abigail Hunter, Janel Chua,
Earl Lawrence, Hari Viswanathan, Daniel O'Malley
ID: 2411.08354
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.08354

Abstract:
Understanding material failure is critical for designing stronger and lighter
structures by identifying weaknesses that could be mitigated. Existing full-
physics numerical simulation techniques involve trade-offs between speed,
accuracy, and the ability to handle complex features like varying boundary
conditions, grid types, resolution, and physical models. We present the first
foundation model specifically designed for predicting material failure,
leveraging large-scale datasets and a high parameter count (up to 3B) to
significantly improve the accuracy of failure predictions. In addition, a large
language model provides rich context embeddings, enabling our model to make
predictions across a diverse range of conditions. Unlike traditional machine
learning models, which are often tailored to specific systems or limited to
narrow simulation conditions, our foundation model is designed to generalize
across different materials and simulators. This flexibility enables the model to
handle a range of material properties and conditions, providing accurate
predictions without the need for retraining or adjustments for each specific
case. Our model is capable of accommodating diverse input formats, such as
images and varying simulation conditions, and producing a range of outputs, from
simulation results to effective properties. It supports both Cartesian and
unstructured grids, with design choices that allow for seamless updates and
extensions as new data and requirements emerge. Our results show that increasing
the scale of the model leads to significant performance gains (loss scales as
$N^{-1.6}$, compared to language models which often scale as $N^{-0.5}$).
