Title: Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning for Automated Resilient Cyber
Defence
Authors: Ross O'Driscoll, Claudia Hagen, Joe Bater, James M. Adams
ID: 2411.17585
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.17585

Abstract:
Cyber-attacks pose a security threat to military command and control networks,
Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (ISR) systems, and civilian
critical national infrastructure. The use of artificial intelligence and
autonomous agents in these attacks increases the scale, range, and complexity of
this threat and the subsequent disruption they cause. Autonomous Cyber Defence
(ACD) agents aim to mitigate this threat by responding at machine speed and at
the scale required to address the problem. Sequential decision-making algorithms
such as Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) provide a promising route to create ACD
agents. These algorithms focus on a single objective such as minimizing the
intrusion of red agents on the network, by using a handcrafted weighted sum of
rewards. This approach removes the ability to adapt the model during inference,
and fails to address the many competing objectives present when operating and
protecting these networks. Conflicting objectives, such as restoring a machine
from a back-up image, must be carefully balanced with the cost of associated
down-time, or the disruption to network traffic or services that might result.
Instead of pursing a Single-Objective RL (SORL) approach, here we present a
simple example of a multi-objective network defence game that requires
consideration of both defending the network against red-agents and maintaining
critical functionality of green-agents. Two Multi-Objective Reinforcement
Learning (MORL) algorithms, namely Multi-Objective Proximal Policy Optimization
(MOPPO), and Pareto-Conditioned Networks (PCN), are used to create two trained
ACD agents whose performance is compared on our Multi-Objective Cyber Defence
game. The benefits and limitations of MORL ACD agents in comparison to SORL ACD
agents are discussed based on the investigations of this game.
