Title: Deep Neural Emulation of the Supermassive Black-hole Binary Population
Authors: Nima Laal, Stephen R. Taylor, Luke Zoltan Kelley, Joseph Simon, Kayhan
Gultekin, David Wright, Bence Becsy, J. Andrew Casey-Clyde, Siyuan Chen,
Alexander Cingoranelli, Daniel J. D'Orazio, Emiko C. Gardiner, William G. Lamb,
Cayenne Matt, Magdalena S. Siwek, Jeremy M. Wachter
ID: 2411.10519
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.10519

Abstract:
While supermassive black-hole (SMBH)-binaries are not the only viable source for
the low-frequency gravitational wave background (GWB) signal evidenced by the
most recent pulsar timing array (PTA) data sets, they are expected to be the
most likely. Thus, connecting the measured PTA GWB spectrum and the underlying
physics governing the demographics and dynamics of SMBH-binaries is extremely
important. Previously, Gaussian processes (GPs) and dense neural networks have
been used to make such a connection by being built as conditional emulators;
their input is some selected evolution or environmental SMBH-binary parameters
and their output is the emulated mean and standard deviation of the GWB strain
ensemble distribution over many Universes. In this paper, we use a normalizing
flow (NF) emulator that is trained on the entirety of the GWB strain ensemble
distribution, rather than only mean and standard deviation. As a result, we can
predict strain distributions that mirror underlying simulations very closely
while also capturing frequency covariances in the strain distributions as well
as statistical complexities such as tails, non-Gaussianities, and
multimodalities that are otherwise not learnable by existing techniques. In
particular, we feature various comparisons between the NF-based emulator and the
GP approach used extensively in past efforts. Our analyses conclude that the NF-
based emulator not only outperforms GPs in the ease and computational cost of
training but also outperforms in the fidelity of the emulated GWB strain
ensemble distributions.
