Title: Know Where You're Uncertain When Planning with Multimodal Foundation
Models: A Formal Framework
Authors: Neel P. Bhatt, Yunhao Yang, Rohan Siva, Daniel Milan, Ufuk Topcu,
Zhangyang Wang
ID: 2411.01639
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.01639

Abstract:
Multimodal foundation models offer a promising framework for robotic perception
and planning by processing sensory inputs to generate actionable plans. However,
addressing uncertainty in both perception (sensory interpretation) and decision-
making (plan generation) remains a critical challenge for ensuring task
reliability. We present a comprehensive framework to disentangle, quantify, and
mitigate these two forms of uncertainty. We first introduce a framework for
uncertainty disentanglement, isolating perception uncertainty arising from
limitations in visual understanding and decision uncertainty relating to the
robustness of generated plans.
  To quantify each type of uncertainty, we propose methods tailored to the
unique properties of perception and decision-making: we use conformal prediction
to calibrate perception uncertainty and introduce Formal-Methods-Driven
Prediction (FMDP) to quantify decision uncertainty, leveraging formal
verification techniques for theoretical guarantees. Building on this
quantification, we implement two targeted intervention mechanisms: an active
sensing process that dynamically re-observes high-uncertainty scenes to enhance
visual input quality and an automated refinement procedure that fine-tunes the
model on high-certainty data, improving its capability to meet task
specifications. Empirical validation in real-world and simulated robotic tasks
demonstrates that our uncertainty disentanglement framework reduces variability
by up to 40% and enhances task success rates by 5% compared to baselines. These
improvements are attributed to the combined effect of both interventions and
highlight the importance of uncertainty disentanglement, which facilitates
targeted interventions that enhance the robustness and reliability of autonomous
systems. Fine-tuned models, code, and datasets are available at
https://uncertainty-in-planning.github.io/.
