Title: CogACT: A Foundational Vision-Language-Action Model for Synergizing
Cognition and Action in Robotic Manipulation
Authors: Qixiu Li, Yaobo Liang, Zeyu Wang, Lin Luo, Xi Chen, Mozheng Liao,
Fangyun Wei, Yu Deng, Sicheng Xu, Yizhong Zhang, Xiaofan Wang, Bei Liu, Jianlong
Fu, Jianmin Bao, Dong Chen, Yuanchun Shi, Jiaolong Yang, Baining Guo
ID: 2411.19650
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.19650

Abstract:
The advancement of large Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models has significantly
improved robotic manipulation in terms of language-guided task execution and
generalization to unseen scenarios. While existing VLAs adapted from pretrained
large Vision-Language-Models (VLM) have demonstrated promising generalizability,
their task performance is still unsatisfactory as indicated by the low tasks
success rates in different environments. In this paper, we present a new
advanced VLA architecture derived from VLM. Unlike previous works that directly
repurpose VLM for action prediction by simple action quantization, we propose a
omponentized VLA architecture that has a specialized action module conditioned
on VLM output. We systematically study the design of the action module and
demonstrates the strong performance enhancement with diffusion action
transformers for action sequence modeling, as well as their favorable scaling
behaviors. We also conduct comprehensive experiments and ablation studies to
evaluate the efficacy of our models with varied designs. The evaluation on 5
robot embodiments in simulation and real work shows that our model not only
significantly surpasses existing VLAs in task performance and but also exhibits
remarkable adaptation to new robots and generalization to unseen objects and
backgrounds. It exceeds the average success rates of OpenVLA which has similar
model size (7B) with ours by over 35% in simulated evaluation and 55% in real
robot experiments. It also outperforms the large RT-2-X model (55B) by 18%
absolute success rates in simulation. Code and models can be found on our
project page (https://cogact.github.io/).
