Title: GIS Copilot: Towards an Autonomous GIS Agent for Spatial Analysis
Authors: Temitope Akinboyewa, Zhenlong Li, Huan Ning, M. Naser Lessani
ID: 2411.03205
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.03205

Abstract:
Recent advancements in Generative AI offer promising capabilities for spatial
analysis. Despite their potential, the integration of generative AI with
established GIS platforms remains underexplored. In this study, we propose a
framework for integrating LLMs directly into existing GIS platforms, using QGIS
as an example. Our approach leverages the reasoning and programming capabilities
of LLMs to autonomously generate spatial analysis workflows and code through an
informed agent that has comprehensive documentation of key GIS tools and
parameters. The implementation of this framework resulted in the development of
a "GIS Copilot" that allows GIS users to interact with QGIS using natural
language commands for spatial analysis. The GIS Copilot was evaluated with over
100 spatial analysis tasks with three complexity levels: basic tasks that
require one GIS tool and typically involve one data layer to perform simple
operations; intermediate tasks involving multi-step processes with multiple
tools, guided by user instructions; and advanced tasks which involve multi-step
processes that require multiple tools but not guided by user instructions,
necessitating the agent to independently decide on and executes the necessary
steps. The evaluation reveals that the GIS Copilot demonstrates strong potential
in automating foundational GIS operations, with a high success rate in tool
selection and code generation for basic and intermediate tasks, while challenges
remain in achieving full autonomy for more complex tasks. This study contributes
to the emerging vision of Autonomous GIS, providing a pathway for non-experts to
engage with geospatial analysis with minimal prior expertise. While full
autonomy is yet to be achieved, the GIS Copilot demonstrates significant
potential for simplifying GIS workflows and enhancing decision-making processes.
