Title: (2+1) Lorentzian quantum cosmology from spin-foams: opportunities and
obstacles for semi-classicality
Authors: Alexander F. Jercher, José Diogo Simão, Sebastian Steinhaus
ID: 2411.08109
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.08109

Abstract:
We construct an effective cosmological spin-foam model for a (2+1) dimensional
spatially flat universe, discretized on a hypercubical lattice, containing both
space- and time-like regions. Our starting point is the recently proposed
coherent state spin-foam model for (2+1) Lorentzian quantum gravity. The full
amplitude is assumed to factorize into single vertex amplitudes with boundary
data corresponding to Lorentzian 3-frusta. A stationary phase approximation is
performed at each vertex individually, where the inverse square root of the
Hessian determinant serves as a measure for the effective path integral.
Additionally, a massive scalar field is coupled to the geometry, and we show
that its mass renders the partition function convergent. For a single 3-frustum
with time-like struts, we compute the expectation value of the bulk strut length
and show that it generically agrees with the classical solutions and that it is
a discontinuous function of the scalar field mass. Allowing the struts to be
space-like introduces causality violations, which drive the expectation values
away from the classical solutions due to the lack of an exponential suppression
of these configurations. This is a direct consequence of the semi-classical
amplitude only containing the real part of deficit angles, in contrast with the
Lorentzian Regge action used in effective spin-foams. We give an outlook on how
to evaluate the partition function on an extended discretization including a
bulk spatial slice. This serves as a foundation for future investigations of
physically interesting scenarios such as a quantum bounce or the viability of
massive scalar field clocks. Our results demonstrate that the effective path
integral in the causally regular sector serves as a viable quantum cosmology
model, but that the agreement of expectation values with classical solutions is
tightly bound to the path integral measure.
