Title: Holographic pseudoentanglement and the complexity of the AdS/CFT
dictionary
Authors: Chris Akers, Adam Bouland, Lijie Chen, Tamara Kohler, Tony Metger,
Umesh Vazirani
ID: 2411.04978
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.04978

Abstract:
The `quantum gravity in the lab' paradigm suggests that quantum computers might
shed light on quantum gravity by simulating the CFT side of the AdS/CFT
correspondence and mapping the results to the AdS side. This relies on the
assumption that the duality map (the `dictionary') is efficient to compute. In
this work, we show that the complexity of the AdS/CFT dictionary is surprisingly
subtle: there might be cases in which one can efficiently apply operators to the
CFT state (a task we call 'operator reconstruction') without being able to
extract basic properties of the dual bulk state such as its geometry (which we
call 'geometry reconstruction'). Geometry reconstruction corresponds to the
setting where we want to extract properties of a completely unknown bulk dual
from a simulated CFT boundary state.
  We demonstrate that geometry reconstruction may be generically hard due to the
connection between geometry and entanglement in holography. In particular we
construct ensembles of states whose entanglement approximately obey the Ryu-
Takayanagi formula for arbitrary geometries, but which are nevertheless
computationally indistinguishable. This suggests that even for states with the
special entanglement structure of holographic CFT states, geometry
reconstruction might be hard. This result should be compared with existing
evidence that operator reconstruction is generically easy in AdS/CFT. A useful
analogy for the difference between these two tasks is quantum fully homomorphic
encryption (FHE): this encrypts quantum states in such a way that no efficient
adversary can learn properties of the state, but operators can be applied
efficiently to the encrypted state. We show that quantum FHE can separate the
complexity of geometry reconstruction vs operator reconstruction, which raises
the question whether FHE could be a useful lens through which to view AdS/CFT.
