Title: Unleashing the power of novel conditional generative approaches for new
materials discovery
Authors: Lev Novitskiy, Vladimir Lazarev, Mikhail Tiutiulnikov, Nikita
Vakhrameev, Roman Eremin, Innokentiy Humonen, Andrey Kuznetsov, Denis Dimitrov,
Semen Budennyy
ID: 2411.03156
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.03156

Abstract:
For a very long time, computational approaches to the design of new materials
have relied on an iterative process of finding a candidate material and modeling
its properties. AI has played a crucial role in this regard, helping to
accelerate the discovery and optimization of crystal properties and structures
through advanced computational methodologies and data-driven approaches. To
address the problem of new materials design and fasten the process of new
materials search, we have applied latest generative approaches to the problem of
crystal structure design, trying to solve the inverse problem: by given
properties generate a structure that satisfies them without utilizing
supercomputer powers. In our work we propose two approaches: 1) conditional
structure modification: optimization of the stability of an arbitrary atomic
configuration, using the energy difference between the most energetically
favorable structure and all its less stable polymorphs and 2) conditional
structure generation. We used a representation for materials that includes the
following information: lattice, atom coordinates, atom types, chemical features,
space group and formation energy of the structure. The loss function was
optimized to take into account the periodic boundary conditions of crystal
structures. We have applied Diffusion models approach, Flow matching, usual
Autoencoder (AE) and compared the results of the models and approaches. As a
metric for the study, physical PyMatGen matcher was employed: we compare target
structure with generated one using default tolerances. So far, our modifier and
generator produce structures with needed properties with accuracy 41% and 82%
respectively. To prove the offered methodology efficiency, inference have been
carried out, resulting in several potentially new structures with formation
energy below the AFLOW-derived convex hulls.
