Title: A Gigaparsec-Scale Hydrodynamic Volume Reconstructed with Deep Learning
Authors: Cooper Jacobus, Roger de Belsunce, Solene Chabanier, Peter Harrington,
JD Emberson, Zarija Lukić, Salman Habib
ID: 2411.16920
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.16920

Abstract:
The next generation of cosmological spectroscopic sky surveys will probe the
distribution of matter across several Gigaparsecs (Gpc) or many billion light-
years. In order to leverage the rich data in these new maps to gain a better
understanding of the physics that shapes the large-scale structure of the
cosmos, observed matter distributions must be compared to simulated mock skies.
Small mock skies can be produced using precise, physics-driven hydrodynamical
simulations. However, the need to capture small, kpc-scale density fluctuations
in the intergalactic medium (IGM) places tight restrictions on the necessary
minimum resolution of these simulations. Even on the most powerful
supercomputers, it is impossible to run simulations of such high resolution in
volumes comparable to what will be probed by future surveys, due to the vast
quantity of data needed to store such a simulation in computer memory. However,
it is possible to represent the essential features of these high-resolution
simulations using orders of magnitude less memory. We present a hybrid approach
that employs a physics-driven hydrodynamical simulation at a much lower-than-
necessary resolution, followed by a data-driven, deep-learning Enhancement. This
hybrid approach allows us to produce hydrodynamic mock skies that accurately
capture small, kpc-scale features in the IGM but which span hundreds of
Megaparsecs. We have produced such a volume which is roughly one Gigaparsec in
diameter and examine its relevant large-scale statistical features, emphasizing
certain properties that could not be captured by previous smaller simulations.
We present this hydrodynamic volume as well as a companion n-body dark matter
simulation and halo catalog which we are making publically available to the
community for use in calibrating data pipelines for upcoming survey analyses.
