Title: Predicting ionic conductivity in solids from the machine-learned
potential energy landscape
Authors: Artem Maevskiy, Alexandra Carvalho, Emil Sataev, Volha Turchyna, Keian
Noori, Aleksandr Rodin, A. H. Castro Neto, Andrey Ustyuzhanin
ID: 2411.06804
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.06804

Abstract:
Discovering new superionic materials is essential for advancing solid-state
batteries, which offer improved energy density and safety compared to the
traditional lithium-ion batteries with liquid electrolytes. Conventional
computational methods for identifying such materials are resource-intensive and
not easily scalable. Recently, universal interatomic potential models have been
developed using equivariant graph neural networks. These models are trained on
extensive datasets of first-principles force and energy calculations. One can
achieve significant computational advantages by leveraging them as the
foundation for traditional methods of assessing the ionic conductivity, such as
molecular dynamics or nudged elastic band techniques. However, the
generalization error from model inference on diverse atomic structures arising
in such calculations can compromise the reliability of the results. In this
work, we propose an approach for the quick and reliable screening of ionic
conductors through the analysis of a universal interatomic potential. Our method
incorporates a set of heuristic structure descriptors that effectively employ
the rich knowledge of the underlying model while requiring minimal
generalization capabilities. Using our descriptors, we rank lithium-containing
materials in the Materials Project database according to their expected ionic
conductivity. Eight out of the ten highest-ranked materials are confirmed to be
superionic at room temperature in first-principles calculations. Notably, our
method achieves a speed-up factor of approximately 50 compared to molecular
dynamics driven by a machine-learning potential, and is at least 3,000 times
faster compared to first-principles molecular dynamics.
