Title: Show, Don't Tell: Learning Reward Machines from Demonstrations for
Reinforcement Learning-Based Cardiac Pacemaker Synthesis
Authors: John Komp, Dananjay Srinivas, Maria Pacheco, Ashutosh Trivedi
ID: 2411.01750
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.01750

Abstract:
An (artificial cardiac) pacemaker is an implantable electronic device that sends
electrical impulses to the heart to regulate the heartbeat. As the number of
pacemaker users continues to rise, so does the demand for features with
additional sensors, adaptability, and improved battery performance.
Reinforcement learning (RL) has recently been proposed as a performant algorithm
for creative design space exploration, adaptation, and statistical verification
of cardiac pacemakers. The design of correct reward functions, expressed as a
reward machine, is a key programming activity in this process. In 2007, Boston
Scientific published a detailed description of their pacemaker specifications.
This document has since formed the basis for several formal characterizations of
pacemaker specifications using real-time automata and logic. However, because
these translations are done manually, they are challenging to verify. Moreover,
capturing requirements in automata or logic is notoriously difficult. We posit
that it is significantly easier for domain experts, such as
electrophysiologists, to observe and identify abnormalities in
electrocardiograms that correspond to patient-pacemaker interactions. Therefore,
we explore the possibility of learning correctness specifications from such
labeled demonstrations in the form of a reward machine and training an RL agent
to synthesize a cardiac pacemaker based on the resulting reward machine. We
leverage advances in machine learning to extract signals from labeled
demonstrations as reward machines using recurrent neural networks and
transformer architectures. These reward machines are then used to design a
simple pacemaker with RL. Finally, we validate the resulting pacemaker using
properties extracted from the Boston Scientific document.
