Title: AIGS: Generating Science from AI-Powered Automated Falsification
Authors: Zijun Liu, Kaiming Liu, Yiqi Zhu, Xuanyu Lei, Zonghan Yang, Zhenhe
Zhang, Peng Li, Yang Liu
ID: 2411.11910
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.11910

Abstract:
Rapid development of artificial intelligence has drastically accelerated the
development of scientific discovery. Trained with large-scale observation data,
deep neural networks extract the underlying patterns in an end-to-end manner and
assist human researchers with highly-precised predictions in unseen scenarios.
The recent rise of Large Language Models (LLMs) and the empowered autonomous
agents enable scientists to gain help through interaction in different stages of
their research, including but not limited to literature review, research
ideation, idea implementation, and academic writing. However, AI researchers
instantiated by foundation model empowered agents with full-process autonomy are
still in their infancy. In this paper, we study $\textbf{AI-Generated Science}$
(AIGS), where agents independently and autonomously complete the entire research
process and discover scientific laws. By revisiting the definition of scientific
research, we argue that $\textit{falsification}$ is the essence of both human
research process and the design of an AIGS system. Through the lens of
falsification, prior systems attempting towards AI-Generated Science either lack
the part in their design, or rely heavily on existing verification engines that
narrow the use in specialized domains. In this work, we propose Baby-AIGS as a
baby-step demonstration of a full-process AIGS system, which is a multi-agent
system with agents in roles representing key research process. By introducing
FalsificationAgent, which identify and then verify possible scientific
discoveries, we empower the system with explicit falsification. Experiments on
three tasks preliminarily show that Baby-AIGS could produce meaningful
scientific discoveries, though not on par with experienced human researchers.
Finally, we discuss on the limitations of current Baby-AIGS, actionable
insights, and related ethical issues in detail.
