Title: An Empirical Study on the Potential of LLMs in Automated Software
Refactoring
Authors: Bo Liu, Yanjie Jiang, Yuxia Zhang, Nan Niu, Guangjie Li, Hui Liu
ID: 2411.04444
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.04444

Abstract:
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs), make it potentially feasible to
automatically refactor source code with LLMs. However, it remains unclear how
well LLMs perform compared to human experts in conducting refactorings
automatically and accurately. To fill this gap, in this paper, we conduct an
empirical study to investigate the potential of LLMs in automated software
refactoring, focusing on the identification of refactoring opportunities and the
recommendation of refactoring solutions. We first construct a high-quality
refactoring dataset comprising 180 real-world refactorings from 20 projects, and
conduct the empirical study on the dataset. With the to-be-refactored Java
documents as input, ChatGPT and Gemini identified only 28 and 7 respectively out
of the 180 refactoring opportunities. However, explaining the expected
refactoring subcategories and narrowing the search space in the prompts
substantially increased the success rate of ChatGPT from 15.6% to 86.7%.
Concerning the recommendation of refactoring solutions, ChatGPT recommended 176
refactoring solutions for the 180 refactorings, and 63.6% of the recommended
solutions were comparable to (even better than) those constructed by human
experts. However, 13 out of the 176 solutions suggested by ChatGPT and 9 out of
the 137 solutions suggested by Gemini were unsafe in that they either changed
the functionality of the source code or introduced syntax errors, which indicate
the risk of LLM-based refactoring. To this end, we propose a detect-and-reapply
tactic, called RefactoringMirror, to avoid such unsafe refactorings. By
reapplying the identified refactorings to the original code using thoroughly
tested refactoring engines, we can effectively mitigate the risks associated
with LLM-based automated refactoring while still leveraging LLM's intelligence
to obtain valuable refactoring recommendations.
