Title: An AI Theory of Mind Will Enhance Our Collective Intelligence
Authors: Michael S. Harré, Catherine Drysdale, Jaime Ruiz-Serra
ID: 2411.09168
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.09168

Abstract:
Collective intelligence plays a central role in many fields, from economics and
evolutionary theory to neural networks and eusocial insects, and is also core to
work on emergence and self-organisation in complex-systems theory. However, in
human collective intelligence there is still much to understand about how
specific psychological processes at the individual level give rise to self-
organised structures at the social level. Psychological factors have so far
played a minor role in collective-intelligence studies because the principles
are often general and applicable to agents without sophisticated psychologies.
We emphasise, with examples from other complex adaptive systems, the broad
applicability of collective-intelligence principles, while noting that
mechanisms and time scales differ markedly between cases. We review evidence
that flexible collective intelligence in human social settings is improved by a
particular cognitive tool: our Theory of Mind. We then hypothesise that AIs
equipped with a theory of mind will enhance collective intelligence in ways
similar to human contributions. To make this case, we step back from the
algorithmic basis of AI psychology and consider the large-scale impact AI can
have as agential actors in a 'social ecology' rather than as mere technological
tools. We identify several key characteristics of psychologically mediated
collective intelligence and show that the development of a Theory of Mind is
crucial in distinguishing human social collective intelligence from more general
forms. Finally, we illustrate how individuals, human or otherwise, integrate
within a collective not by being genetically or algorithmically programmed, but
by growing and adapting into the socio-cognitive niche they occupy. AI can
likewise inhabit one or multiple such niches, facilitated by a Theory of Mind.
