Title: How do supernova remnants cool? II. Machine learning analysis of
supernova remnant simulations
Authors: P. Smirnova, E. I. Makarenko, S. D. Clarke, E. Glukhov, S. Walch, I.
Vaezzadeh, D. Seifried
ID: 2411.12839
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.12839

Abstract:
About 15%-60% of all supernova remnants are estimated to interact with dense
molecular clouds. In these high density environments, radiative losses are
significant. The cooling radiation can be observed in forbidden lines at optical
wavelengths. We aim to determine whether supernovae at different positions
within a molecular cloud can be distinguished based on their optical emission,
using machine learning. We have conducted a statistical analysis of the optical
line emission of simulated supernovae interacting with molecular clouds that
formed from the multi-phase interstellar medium modelled in the SILCC-Zoom
simulations with and without magnetic fields. This work is based on the post-
processing of 3-D (magneto)hydrodynamical simulations. Our data set consists of
22 simulations. The supernovae are placed at a distance of either 25 pc or 50 pc
from the molecular cloud centre of mass. First, we calculate optical synthetic
emission maps (taking into account dust attenuation within the simulation sub-
cube). Second, we analyse the data set of synthetic observations using principle
component analysis to identify clusters with the k-means algorithm. We find that
the presence or absence of magnetic fields has no statistically significant
effect on the optical line emission. However, the ambient density distribution
at the site of the supernova changes the entire evolution and morphology of the
supernova remnant. Due to the different ambient densities in the 25 pc and 50 pc
simulations, we are able to distinguish them in a statistically significant
manner. Although, optical line attenuation within the supernova remnant can
mimic this result depending on the attenuation model that is used. That is why,
multi-dimensional analysis of optical emission line ratios in this work does not
give extra information about the environmental conditions (ambient density and
ambient magnetic field) of the SNR.
