Title: DrugGen: Advancing Drug Discovery with Large Language Models and
Reinforcement Learning Feedback
Authors: Mahsa Sheikholeslami, Navid Mazrouei, Yousof Gheisari, Afshin Fasihi,
Matin Irajpour, Ali Motahharynia
ID: 2411.14157
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.14157

Abstract:
Traditional drug design faces significant challenges due to inherent chemical
and biological complexities, often resulting in high failure rates in clinical
trials. Deep learning advancements, particularly generative models, offer
potential solutions to these challenges. One promising algorithm is DrugGPT, a
transformer-based model, that generates small molecules for input protein
sequences. Although promising, it generates both chemically valid and invalid
structures and does not incorporate the features of approved drugs, resulting in
time-consuming and inefficient drug discovery. To address these issues, we
introduce DrugGen, an enhanced model based on the DrugGPT structure. DrugGen is
fine-tuned on approved drug-target interactions and optimized with proximal
policy optimization. By giving reward feedback from protein-ligand binding
affinity prediction using pre-trained transformers (PLAPT) and a customized
invalid structure assessor, DrugGen significantly improves performance.
Evaluation across multiple targets demonstrated that DrugGen achieves 100% valid
structure generation compared to 95.5% with DrugGPT and produced molecules with
higher predicted binding affinities (7.22 [6.30-8.07]) compared to DrugGPT (5.81
[4.97-6.63]) while maintaining diversity and novelty. Docking simulations
further validate its ability to generate molecules targeting binding sites
effectively. For example, in the case of fatty acid-binding protein 5 (FABP5),
DrugGen generated molecules with superior docking scores (FABP5/11, -9.537 and
FABP5/5, -8.399) compared to the reference molecule (Palmitic acid, -6.177).
Beyond lead compound generation, DrugGen also shows potential for drug
repositioning and creating novel pharmacophores for existing targets. By
producing high-quality small molecules, DrugGen provides a high-performance
medium for advancing pharmaceutical research and drug discovery.
