Title: Machine Learning-Based Automated Assessment of Intracorporeal Suturing in
Laparoscopic Fundoplication
Authors: Shekhar Madhav Khairnar, Huu Phong Nguyen, Alexis Desir, Carla Holcomb,
Daniel J. Scott, Ganesh Sankaranarayanan
ID: 2412.16195
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.16195

Abstract:
Automated assessment of surgical skills using artificial intelligence (AI)
provides trainees with instantaneous feedback. After bimanual tool motions are
captured, derived kinematic metrics are reliable predictors of performance in
laparoscopic tasks. Implementing automated tool tracking requires time-intensive
human annotation. We developed AI-based tool tracking using the Segment Anything
Model (SAM) to eliminate the need for human annotators. Here, we describe a
study evaluating the usefulness of our tool tracking model in automated
assessment during a laparoscopic suturing task in the fundoplication procedure.
An automated tool tracking model was applied to recorded videos of Nissen
fundoplication on porcine bowel. Surgeons were grouped as novices (PGY1-2) and
experts (PGY3-5, attendings). The beginning and end of each suturing step were
segmented, and motions of the left and right tools were extracted. A low-pass
filter with a 24 Hz cut-off frequency removed noise. Performance was assessed
using supervised and unsupervised models, and an ablation study compared
results. Kinematic features--RMS velocity, RMS acceleration, RMS jerk, total
path length, and Bimanual Dexterity--were extracted and analyzed using Logistic
Regression, Random Forest, Support Vector Classifier, and XGBoost. PCA was
performed for feature reduction. For unsupervised learning, a Denoising
Autoencoder (DAE) model with classifiers, such as a 1-D CNN and traditional
models, was trained. Data were extracted for 28 participants (9 novices, 19
experts). Supervised learning with PCA and Random Forest achieved an accuracy of
0.795 and an F1 score of 0.778. The unsupervised 1-D CNN achieved superior
results with an accuracy of 0.817 and an F1 score of 0.806, eliminating the need
for kinematic feature computation. We demonstrated an AI model capable of
automated performance classification, independent of human annotation.
