Title: Unveiling the Role of Artificial Intelligence and Stock Market Growth in
Achieving Carbon Neutrality in the United States: An ARDL Model Analysis
Authors: Azizul Hakim Rafi, Abdullah Al Abrar Chowdhury, Adita Sultana, Abdulla
All Noman
ID: 2412.16166
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.16166

Abstract:
Given the fact that climate change has become one of the most pressing problems
in many countries in recent years, specialized research on how to mitigate
climate change has been adopted by many countries. Within this discussion, the
influence of advanced technologies in achieving carbon neutrality has been
discussed. While several studies investigated how AI and Digital innovations
could be used to reduce the environmental footprint, the actual influence of AI
in reducing CO2 emissions (a proxy measuring carbon footprint) has yet to be
investigated. This paper studies the role of advanced technologies in general,
and Artificial Intelligence (AI) and ICT use in particular, in advancing carbon
neutrality in the United States, between 2021. Secondly, this paper examines how
Stock Market Growth, ICT use, Gross Domestic Product (GDP), and Population
affect CO2 emissions using the STIRPAT model. After examining stationarity among
the variables using a variety of unit root tests, this study concluded that
there are no unit root problems across all the variables, with a mixed order of
integration. The ARDL bounds test for cointegration revealed that variables in
this study have a long-run relationship. Moreover, the estimates revealed from
the ARDL model in the short- and long-run indicated that economic growth, stock
market capitalization, and population significantly contributed to the carbon
emissions in both the short-run and long-run. Conversely, AI and ICT use
significantly reduced carbon emissions over both periods. Furthermore, findings
were confirmed to be robust using FMOLS, DOLS, and CCR estimations. Furthermore,
diagnostic tests indicated the absence of serial correlation,
heteroscedasticity, and specification errors and, thus, the model was robust.
