Title: Wireless Environmental Information Theory: A New Paradigm towards 6G
Online and Proactive Environment Intelligence Communication
Authors: Jianhua Zhang, Li Yu, Shaoyi Liu, Yichen Cai, Yuxiang Zhang, Hongbo
Xing, Tao jiang
ID: 2412.11479
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11479

Abstract:
The channel is one of the five critical components of a communication system,
and its ergodic capacity is based on all realizations of statistic channel
model. This statistical paradigm has successfully guided the design of mobile
communication systems from 1G to 5G. However, this approach relies on offline
channel measurements in specific environments, and the system passively adapts
to new environments, resulting in deviation from the optimal performance. With
the pursuit of higher capacity and data rate of 6G, especially facing the
ubiquitous environments, there is an urgent need for a new paradigm to combat
the randomness of channel, i.e., more proactive and online manner. Motivated by
this, we propose an environment intelligence communication (EIC) based on
wireless environmental information theory (WEIT) for 6G. The proposed EIC
architecture is composed of three steps: Firstly, wireless environmental
information (WEI) is acquired using sensing techniques. Then, leveraging WEI and
channel data, AI techniques are employed to predict channel fading, thereby
mitigating channel uncertainty. Thirdly, the communication system autonomously
determines the optimal air-interface transmission strategy based on real-time
channel predictions, enabling intelligent interaction with the physical
environment. To make this attractive paradigm shift from theory to practice, we
answer three key problems to establish WEIT for the first time. How should WEI
be defined? Can it be quantified? Does it hold the same properties as
statistical communication information? Furthermore, EIC aided by WEI (EIC-WEI)
is validated across multiple air-interface tasks, including CSI prediction, beam
prediction, and radio resource management. Simulation results demonstrate that
the proposed EIC-WEI significantly outperforms the statistical paradigm in
decreasing overhead and performance optimization.
