Title: Creating an LLM-based AI-agent: A high-level methodology towards
enhancing LLMs with APIs
Authors: Ioannis Tzachristas
ID: 2412.13233
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.13233

Abstract:
Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized various aspects of engineering
and science. Their utility is often bottlenecked by the lack of interaction with
the external digital environment. To overcome this limitation and achieve
integration of LLMs and Artificial Intelligence (AI) into real-world
applications, customized AI agents are being constructed. Based on the
technological trends and techniques, we extract a high-level approach for
constructing these AI agents, focusing on their underlying architecture. This
thesis serves as a comprehensive guide that elucidates a multi-faceted approach
for empowering LLMs with the capability to leverage Application Programming
Interfaces (APIs). We present a 7-step methodology that begins with the
selection of suitable LLMs and the task decomposition that is necessary for
complex problem-solving. This methodology includes techniques for generating
training data for API interactions and heuristics for selecting the appropriate
API among a plethora of options. These steps eventually lead to the generation
of API calls that are both syntactically and semantically aligned with the LLM's
understanding of a given task. Moreover, we review existing frameworks and tools
that facilitate these processes and highlight the gaps in current attempts. In
this direction, we propose an on-device architecture that aims to exploit the
functionality of carry-on devices by using small models from the Hugging Face
community. We examine the effectiveness of these approaches on real-world
applications of various domains, including the generation of a piano sheet.
Through an extensive analysis of the literature and available technologies, this
thesis aims to set a compass for researchers and practitioners to harness the
full potential of LLMs augmented with external tool capabilities, thus paving
the way for more autonomous, robust, and context-aware AI agents.
