Title: Emerging Security Challenges of Large Language Models
Authors: Herve Debar, Sven Dietrich, Pavel Laskov, Emil C. Lupu, Eirini Ntoutsi
ID: 2412.17614
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.17614

Abstract:
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved record adoption in a short period of
time across many different sectors including high importance areas such as
education [4] and healthcare [23]. LLMs are open-ended models trained on diverse
data without being tailored for specific downstream tasks, enabling broad
applicability across various domains. They are commonly used for text
generation, but also widely used to assist with code generation [3], and even
analysis of security information, as Microsoft Security Copilot demonstrates
[18]. Traditional Machine Learning (ML) models are vulnerable to adversarial
attacks [9]. So the concerns on the potential security implications of such wide
scale adoption of LLMs have led to the creation of this working group on the
security of LLMs. During the Dagstuhl seminar on "Network Attack Detection and
Defense - AI-Powered Threats and Responses", the working group discussions
focused on the vulnerability of LLMs to adversarial attacks, rather than their
potential use in generating malware or enabling cyberattacks. Although we note
the potential threat represented by the latter, the role of the LLMs in such
uses is mostly as an accelerator for development, similar to what it is in
benign use. To make the analysis more specific, the working group employed
ChatGPT as a concrete example of an LLM and addressed the following points,
which also form the structure of this report: 1. How do LLMs differ in
vulnerabilities from traditional ML models? 2. What are the attack objectives in
LLMs? 3. How complex it is to assess the risks posed by the vulnerabilities of
LLMs? 4. What is the supply chain in LLMs, how data flow in and out of systems
and what are the security implications? We conclude with an overview of open
challenges and outlook.
