Title: LABIIUM: AI-Enhanced Zero-configuration Measurement Automation System
Authors: Emmanuel A. Olowe, Danial Chitnis
ID: 2412.16172
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.16172

Abstract:
The complexity of laboratory environments requires solutions that simplify
instrument interaction and enhance measurement automation. Traditional tools
often require configuration, software, and programming skills, creating barriers
to productivity. Previous approaches, including dedicated software suites and
custom scripts, frequently fall short in providing user-friendly solutions that
align with programming practices. We present LABIIUM, an AI-enhanced, zero-
configuration measurement automation system designed to streamline experimental
workflows and improve user productivity. LABIIUM integrates an AI assistant
powered by Large Language Models (LLMs) to generate code. LABIIUM's Lab-
Automation-Measurement Bridges (LAMBs) enable seamless instrument connectivity
using standard tools such as VSCode and Python, eliminating setup overhead. To
demonstrate its capabilities, we conducted experiments involving the measurement
of the parametric transfer curve of a simple two-transistor inverting amplifier
with a current source load. The AI assistant was evaluated using different
prompt scenarios and compared with multiple models, including Claude Sonnet 3.5,
Gemini Pro 1.5, and GPT-4o. An expert solution implementing the Gradient-
Weighted Adaptive Stochastic Sampling (GWASS) method was used as a baseline. The
solutions generated by the AI assistant were compared with the expert solution
and a uniform linear sweep baseline with 10,000 points. The graph results show
that the LLMs were able to successfully complete the most basic uniform sweep,
but LLMs were unable to develop adaptive sweeping algorithms to compete with
GWASS. The evaluation underscores LABIIUM's ability to enhance laboratory
productivity and support digital transformation in research and industry, and
emphasizes the future work required to improve LLM performance in Electronic
Measurement Science Tasks.
