Title: Applying the maximum entropy principle to neural networks enhances multi-
species distribution models
Authors: Maxime Ryckewaert, Diego Marcos, Christophe Botella, Maximilien
Servajean, Pierre Bonnet, Alexis Joly
ID: 2412.19217
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.19217

Abstract:
The rapid expansion of citizen science initiatives has led to a significant
growth of biodiversity databases, and particularly presence-only (PO)
observations. PO data are invaluable for understanding species distributions and
their dynamics, but their use in a Species Distribution Model (SDM) is curtailed
by sampling biases and the lack of information on absences. Poisson point
processes are widely used for SDMs, with Maxent being one of the most popular
methods. Maxent maximises the entropy of a probability distribution across sites
as a function of predefined transformations of variables, called features. In
contrast, neural networks and deep learning have emerged as a promising
technique for automatic feature extraction from complex input variables.
Arbitrarily complex transformations of input variables can be learned from the
data efficiently through backpropagation and stochastic gradient descent (SGD).
In this paper, we propose DeepMaxent, which harnesses neural networks to
automatically learn shared features among species, using the maximum entropy
principle. To do so, it employs a normalised Poisson loss where for each
species, presence probabilities across sites are modelled by a neural network.
We evaluate DeepMaxent on a benchmark dataset known for its spatial sampling
biases, using PO data for calibration and presence-absence (PA) data for
validation across six regions with different biological groups and covariates.
Our results indicate that DeepMaxent performs better than Maxent and other
leading SDMs across all regions and taxonomic groups. The method performs
particularly well in regions of uneven sampling, demonstrating substantial
potential to increase SDM performances. In particular, our approach yields more
accurate predictions than traditional single-species models, which opens up new
possibilities for methodological enhancement.
