Title: GroupFace: Imbalanced Age Estimation Based on Multi-hop Attention Graph
Convolutional Network and Group-aware Margin Optimization
Authors: Yiping Zhang, Yuntao Shou, Wei Ai, Tao Meng, Keqin Li
ID: 2412.11450
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11450

Abstract:
With the recent advances in computer vision, age estimation has significantly
improved in overall accuracy. However, owing to the most common methods do not
take into account the class imbalance problem in age estimation datasets, they
suffer from a large bias in recognizing long-tailed groups. To achieve high-
quality imbalanced learning in long-tailed groups, the dominant solution lies in
that the feature extractor learns the discriminative features of different
groups and the classifier is able to provide appropriate and unbiased margins
for different groups by the discriminative features. Therefore, in this novel,
we propose an innovative collaborative learning framework (GroupFace) that
integrates a multi-hop attention graph convolutional network and a dynamic
group-aware margin strategy based on reinforcement learning. Specifically, to
extract the discriminative features of different groups, we design an enhanced
multi-hop attention graph convolutional network. This network is capable of
capturing the interactions of neighboring nodes at different distances, fusing
local and global information to model facial deep aging, and exploring diverse
representations of different groups. In addition, to further address the class
imbalance problem, we design a dynamic group-aware margin strategy based on
reinforcement learning to provide appropriate and unbiased margins for different
groups. The strategy divides the sample into four age groups and considers
identifying the optimum margins for various age groups by employing a Markov
decision process. Under the guidance of the agent, the feature representation
bias and the classification margin deviation between different groups can be
reduced simultaneously, balancing inter-class separability and intra-class
proximity. After joint optimization, our architecture achieves excellent
performance on several age estimation benchmark datasets.
