Title: How Green Can AI Be? A Study of Trends in Machine Learning Environmental
Impacts
Authors: Clément Morand, Anne-Laure Ligozat, Aurélie Névéol
ID: 2412.17376
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.17376

Abstract:
The compute requirements associated with training Artificial Intelligence (AI)
models have increased exponentially over time. Optimisation strategies aim to
reduce the energy consumption and environmental impacts associated with AI,
possibly shifting impacts from the use phase to the manufacturing phase in the
life-cycle of hardware. This paper investigates the evolution of individual
graphics cards production impacts and of the environmental impacts associated
with training Machine Learning (ML) models over time. We collect information on
graphics cards used to train ML models and released between 2013 and 2023. We
assess the environmental impacts associated with the production of each card to
visualize the trends on the same period. Then, using information on notable AI
systems from the Epoch AI dataset we assess the environmental impacts associated
with training each system. The environmental impacts of graphics cards
production have increased continuously. The energy consumption and environmental
impacts associated with training models have increased exponentially, even when
considering reduction strategies such as location shifting to places with less
carbon intensive electricity mixes. These results suggest that current impact
reduction strategies cannot curb the growth in the environmental impacts of AI.
This is consistent with rebound effect, where the efficiency increases fuel the
creation of even larger models thereby cancelling the potential impact
reduction. Furthermore, these results highlight the importance of considering
the impacts of hardware over the entire life-cycle rather than the sole usage
phase in order to avoid impact shifting. The environmental impact of AI cannot
be reduced without reducing AI activities as well as increasing efficiency.
