Title: Machine learning in wastewater treatment: insights from modelling a pilot
denitrification reactor
Authors: Eivind Bøhn, Sølve Eidnes, Kjell Rune Jonassen
ID: 2412.14030
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14030

Abstract:
Wastewater treatment plants are increasingly recognized as promising candidates
for machine learning applications, due to their societal importance and high
availability of data. However, their varied designs, operational conditions, and
influent characteristics hinder straightforward automation. In this study, we
use data from a pilot reactor at the Veas treatment facility in Norway to
explore how machine learning can be used to optimize biological nitrate
($\mathrm{NO_3^-}$) reduction to molecular nitrogen ($\mathrm{N_2}$) in the
biogeochemical process known as \textit{denitrification}. Rather than focusing
solely on predictive accuracy, our approach prioritizes understanding the
foundational requirements for effective data-driven modelling of wastewater
treatment. Specifically, we aim to identify which process parameters are most
critical, the necessary data quantity and quality, how to structure data
effectively, and what properties are required by the models. We find that
nonlinear models perform best on the training and validation data sets,
indicating nonlinear relationships to be learned, but linear models transfer
better to the unseen test data, which comes later in time. The variable
measuring the water temperature has a particularly detrimental effect on the
models, owing to a significant change in distributions between training and test
data. We therefore conclude that multiple years of data is necessary to learn
robust machine learning models. By addressing foundational elements,
particularly in the context of the climatic variability faced by northern
regions, this work lays the groundwork for a more structured and tailored
approach to machine learning for wastewater treatment. We share publicly both
the data and code used to produce the results in the paper.
