Title: Machine Unlearning Doesn't Do What You Think: Lessons for Generative AI
Policy and Research
Authors: A. Feder Cooper, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Miranda Bogen, Kevin
Klyman, Matthew Jagielski, Katja Filippova, Ken Liu, Alexandra Chouldechova,
Jamie Hayes, Yangsibo Huang, Eleni Triantafillou, Peter Kairouz, Nicole Elyse
Mitchell, Niloofar Mireshghallah, Abigail Z. Jacobs, James Grimmelmann, Vitaly
Shmatikov, Christopher De Sa, Ilia Shumailov, Andreas Terzis, Solon Barocas,
Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, danah boyd, Yejin Choi, Sanmi Koyejo, Fernando
Delgado, Percy Liang, Daniel E. Ho, Pamela Samuelson, Miles Brundage, David Bau,
Seth Neel, Hanna Wallach, Amy B. Cyphert, Mark A. Lemley, Nicolas Papernot,
Katherine Lee
ID: 2412.06966
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.06966

Abstract:
"Machine unlearning" is a popular proposed solution for mitigating the existence
of content in an AI model that is problematic for legal or moral reasons,
including privacy, copyright, safety, and more. For example, unlearning is often
invoked as a solution for removing the effects of specific information from a
generative-AI model's parameters, e.g., a particular individual's personal data
or the inclusion of copyrighted content in the model's training data. Unlearning
is also proposed as a way to prevent a model from generating targeted types of
information in its outputs, e.g., generations that closely resemble a particular
individual's data or reflect the concept of "Spiderman." Both of these goals--
the targeted removal of information from a model and the targeted suppression of
information from a model's outputs--present various technical and substantive
challenges. We provide a framework for ML researchers and policymakers to think
rigorously about these challenges, identifying several mismatches between the
goals of unlearning and feasible implementations. These mismatches explain why
unlearning is not a general-purpose solution for circumscribing generative-AI
model behavior in service of broader positive impact.
