Title: Detectability of biosignatures in warm, water-rich atmospheres
Authors: Benjamin Taysum, Iris van Zelst, John Lee Grenfell, Franz Schreier,
Juan Cabrera, Heike Rauer
ID: 2412.01266
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.01266

Abstract:
Warm rocky exoplanets within the habitable zone of Sun-like stars are favoured
targets for current and future missions. Theory indicates these planets could be
wet at formation and remain habitable long enough for life to develop. In this
work we test the climate-chemistry response, maintenance, and detectability of
biosignatures in warm, water-rich atmospheres with Earth biomass fluxes within
the framework of the planned LIFE mission. We used the coupled climate-chemistry
column model 1D-TERRA to simulate the composition of planetary atmospheres at
different distances from the Sun, assuming Earth's planetary parameters and
evolution. We increased the incoming instellation by up to 50 percent in steps
of 10 percent, corresponding to orbits of 1.00 to 0.82 AU. Simulations were
performed with and without modern Earth's biomass fluxes. Emission spectra of
all simulations were produced using the GARLIC radiative transfer model. LIFEsim
was then used to add noise to and simulate observations of these spectra to
assess how biotic and abiotic atmospheres of Earth-like planets can be
distinguished. Increasing instellation leads to surface water vapour pressures
rising from 0.01 bar (1.13%) to 0.61 bar (34.72%). In the biotic scenarios, the
ozone layer survives because hydrogen oxide reactions with nitrogen oxides
prevent the net ozone chemical sink from increasing. Synthetic observations with
LIFEsim, assuming a 2.0 m aperture and resolving power of R = 50, show that O3
signatures at 9.6 micron reliably point to Earth-like biosphere surface fluxes
of O2 only for systems within 10 parsecs. Increasing the aperture to 3.5 m
increases this range to 22.5 pc. The differences in atmospheric temperature due
to differing H2O profiles also enables observations at 15.0 micron to reliably
identify planets with a CH4 surface flux equal to that of Earth's biosphere.
