Title: A Novel Technosignature Search in the Breakthrough Listen Green Bank
Telescope Archive
Authors: Caleb Painter, Steve Croft, Matthew Lebofsky, Alex Andersson, Carmen
Choza, Vishal Gajjar, Danny Price, Andrew P. V. Siemion
ID: 2412.05786
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.05786

Abstract:
The Breakthrough Listen program is, to date, the most extensive search for
technological life beyond Earth. As part of this goal, over the past nine years
it has surveyed thousands of nearby stars, close to 100 nearby galaxies, and a
variety of exotic and solar system objects with telescopes around the world,
including the Robert C. Byrd Green Bank Telescope (GBT) in West Virginia. The
goal is to find evidence of technosignatures of other civilizations, such as
narrowband Doppler drifting radio signals. Despite the GBT's location in a
radio-quiet zone, the primary challenge of this search continues to be the high
quantities of human-generated radio-frequency interference (RFI), and the
ability to pick out genuinely promising candidates from it. Here we present a
novel search method aimed at finding these `needle-in-a-haystack' type signals,
applied to 6,630 observation cadences of 2,623 stars (each observed with one or
more of the L, S, C, and X band receivers) from the GBT archive. We implement a
low-complexity statistical process to vet out RFI and highlight signals that,
upon visual inspection, appear more promising than those from previous analyses.
Our work returns candidate signals found previously using both traditional and
machine learning algorithms, as well as many promising ones not previously
identified. This analysis represents the largest dataset searched for
technosignatures to date, and highlights the efficacy that traditional (non-
machine-learning) algorithms continue to have in these types of technosignature
searches. We find that less than 1% of stars host transmitters brighter than 0.3
Arecibo radar equivalents broadcasting in our direction over the frequency band
covered.
