Title: Characterizing Jupiter's interior using machine learning reveals four key
structures
Authors: Maayan Ziv, Eli Galanti, Saburo Howard, Tristan Guillot, Yohai Kaspi
ID: 2412.01611
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.01611

Abstract:
The internal structure of Jupiter is constrained by the precise gravity field
measurements by NASA's Juno mission, atmospheric data from the Galileo entry
probe, and Voyager radio occultations. Not only are these observations few
compared to the possible interior setups and their multiple controlling
parameters, but they remain challenging to reconcile. As a complex,
multidimensional problem, characterizing typical structures can help simplify
the modeling process. We used NeuralCMS, a deep learning model based on the
accurate concentric Maclaurin spheroid (CMS) method, coupled with a fully
consistent wind model to efficiently explore a wide range of interior models
without prior assumptions. We then identified those consistent with the
measurements and clustered the plausible combinations of parameters controlling
the interior. We determine the plausible ranges of internal structures and the
dynamical contributions to Jupiter's gravity field. Four typical interior
structures are identified, characterized by their envelope and core properties.
This reduces the dimensionality of Jupiter's interior to only two effective
parameters. Within the reduced 2D phase space, we show that the most
observationally constrained structures fall within one of the key structures,
but they require a higher 1 bar temperature than the observed value. We provide
a robust framework for characterizing giant planet interiors with consistent
wind treatment, demonstrating that for Jupiter, wind constraints strongly impact
the gravity harmonics while the interior parameter distribution remains largely
unchanged. Importantly, we find that Jupiter's interior can be described by two
effective parameters that clearly distinguish the four characteristic structures
and conclude that atmospheric measurements may not fully represent the entire
envelope.
