Title: Eigenstate Preparation on Quantum Computers
Authors: Joey Bonitati
ID: 2412.15081
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15081

Abstract:
This thesis investigates quantum algorithms for eigenstate preparation, with a
focus on solving eigenvalue problems such as the Schrodinger equation by
utilizing near-term quantum computing devices. These problems are ubiquitous in
several scientific fields, but more accurate solutions are specifically needed
as a prerequisite for many quantum simulation tasks. To address this, we
establish three methods in detail: quantum adiabatic evolution with optimal
control, the Rodeo Algorithm, and the Variational Rodeo Algorithm. The first
method explored is adiabatic evolution, a technique that prepares quantum states
by simulating a quantum system that evolves slowly over time. The adiabatic
theorem can be used to ensure that the system remains in an eigenstate
throughout the process, but its implementation can often be infeasible on
current quantum computing hardware. We employ a unique approach using optimal
control to create custom gate operations for superconducting qubits and
demonstrate the algorithm on a two-qubit IBM cloud quantum computing device. We
then explore an alternative to adiabatic evolution, the Rodeo Algorithm, which
offers a different approach to eigenstate preparation by using a controlled
quantum evolution that selectively filters out undesired components in the wave
function stored on a quantum register. We show results suggesting that this
method can be effective in preparing eigenstates, but its practicality is
predicated on the preparation of an initial state that has significant overlap
with the desired eigenstate. To address this, we introduce the novel Variational
Rodeo Algorithm, which replaces the initialization step with dynamic
optimization of quantum circuit parameters to increase the success probability
of the Rodeo Algorithm. The added flexibility compensates for instances in which
the original algorithm can be unsuccessful, allowing for better scalability.
