Title: Diffusion-VLA: Generalizable and Interpretable Robot Foundation Model via
Self-Generated Reasoning
Authors: Junjie Wen, Minjie Zhu, Yichen Zhu, Zhibin Tang, Jinming Li, Zhongyi
Zhou, Chengmeng Li, Xiaoyu Liu, Yaxin Peng, Chaomin Shen, Feifei Feng
ID: 2412.03293
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.03293

Abstract:
In this paper, we present DiffusionVLA, a novel framework that seamlessly
combines the autoregression model with the diffusion model for learning
visuomotor policy. Central to our approach is a next-token prediction objective,
enabling the model to reason effectively over the user's query in the context of
current observations. Subsequently, a diffusion model is attached to generate
robust action outputs. To enhance policy learning through self-reasoning, we
introduce a novel reasoning injection module that integrates reasoning phrases
directly into the policy learning process. The whole framework is simple and
flexible, making it easy to deploy and upgrade. We conduct extensive experiments
using multiple real robots to validate the effectiveness of DiffusionVLA. Our
tests include a challenging factory sorting task, where DiffusionVLA
successfully categorizes objects, including those not seen during training. We
observe that the reasoning module makes the model interpretable. It allows
observers to understand the model thought process and identify potential causes
of policy failures. Additionally, we test DiffusionVLA on a zero-shot bin-
picking task, achieving 63.7\% accuracy on 102 previously unseen objects. Our
method demonstrates robustness to visual changes, such as distractors and new
backgrounds, and easily adapts to new embodiments. Furthermore, DiffusionVLA can
follow novel instructions and retain conversational ability. Notably,
DiffusionVLA is data-efficient and fast at inference; our smallest
DiffusionVLA-2B runs 82Hz on a single A6000 GPU and can train from scratch on
less than 50 demonstrations for a complex task. Finally, we scale the model from
2B to 72B parameters, showcasing improved generalization capabilities with
increased model size.
