Title: Attention-aware convolutional neural networks for identification of
magnetic islands in the tearing mode on EAST tokamak
Authors: Feifei Long, Yian Zhao, Yunjiao Zhang, Chenguang Wan, Yinan Zhou, Ziwei
Qiang, Kangning Yang, Jiuying Li, Tonghui Shi, Bihao Guo, Yang Zhang, Hailing
Zhao, Ang Ti, Adi Liu, Chu Zhou, Jinlin Xie, Zixi Liu, Ge Zhuang, EAST Team
ID: 2412.13498
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.13498

Abstract:
The tearing mode, a large-scale MHD instability in tokamak, typically disrupts
the equilibrium magnetic surfaces, leads to the formation of magnetic islands,
and reduces core electron temperature and density, thus resulting in significant
energy losses and may even cause discharge termination. This process is
unacceptable for ITER. Therefore, the accurate identification of a magnetic
island in real time is crucial for the effective control of the tearing mode in
ITER in the future. In this study, based on the characteristics induced by
tearing modes, an attention-aware convolutional neural network (AM-CNN) is
proposed to identify the presence of magnetic islands in tearing mode discharge
utilizing the data from ECE diagnostics in the EAST tokamak. A total of 11 ECE
channels covering the range of core is used in the tearing mode dataset, which
includes 2.5*10^9 data collected from 68 shots from 2016 to 2021 years. We split
the dataset into training, validation, and test sets (66.5%, 5.7%, and 27.8%),
respectively. An attention mechanism is designed to couple with the
convolutional neural networks to improve the capability of feature extraction of
signals. During the model training process, we utilized adaptive learning rate
adjustment and early stopping mechanisms to optimize performance of AM-CNN. The
model results show that a classification accuracy of 91.96% is achieved in
tearing mode identification. Compared to CNN without AM, the attention-aware
convolutional neural networks demonstrate great performance across accuracy,
recall metrics, and F1 score. By leveraging the deep learning model, which
incorporates a physical understanding of the tearing process to identify tearing
mode behaviors, the combination of physical mechanisms and deep learning is
emphasized, significantly laying an important foundation for the future
intelligent control of tearing mode dynamics.
