Title: Gamma-Ray Burst Light Curve Reconstruction: A Comparative Machine and
Deep Learning Analysis
Authors: A. Manchanda, A. Kaushal, M. G. Dainotti, A. Deepu, S. Naqi, J. Felix,
N. Indoriya, S. P. Magesh, H. Gupta, K. Gupta, A. Madhan, D. H. Hartmann, A.
Pollo, M. Bogdan, J. X. Prochaska, N. Fraija, D. Debnath
ID: 2412.20091
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.20091

Abstract:
Gamma-Ray Bursts (GRBs), observed at high-z, are probes of the evolution of the
Universe and can be used as cosmological tools. Thus, we need correlations with
small dispersion among key parameters. To reduce such a dispersion, we mitigate
gaps in light curves (LCs), including the plateau region, key to building the
two-dimensional Dainotti relation between the end time of plateau emission (Ta)
and its luminosity (La). We reconstruct LCs using nine models: Multi-Layer
Perceptron (MLP), Bi-Mamba, Fourier Transform, Gaussian Process-Random Forest
Hybrid (GP-RF), Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (Bi-LSTM), Conditional GAN
(CGAN), SARIMAX-based Kalman filter, Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks (KANs), and
Attention U-Net. These methods are compared to the Willingale model (W07) over a
sample of 521 GRBs. MLP and Attention U-Net outperform other methods, with MLP
reducing the plateau parameter uncertainties by 37.2% for log Ta, 38.0% for log
Fa, and 41.2% for alpha (the post-plateau slope in the W07 model), achieving the
lowest 5-fold cross-validation (CV) mean squared error (MSE) of 0.0275.
Attention U-Net achieved the lowest uncertainty of parameters, a 37.9% reduction
in log Ta, a 38.5% reduction in log Fa and a 41.4% reduction in alpha, but with
a higher MSE of 0.134. Although Attention U-Net achieves the largest uncertainty
reduction, the MLP attains the lowest test MSE while maintaining comparable
uncertainty performance, making it the more reliable model. The other methods
yield MSE values ranging from 0.0339 to 0.174. These improvements in parameter
precision are needed to use GRBs as standard candles, investigate theoretical
models, and predict GRB redshifts through machine learning.
