Title: Maximizing Information in Neuron Populations for Neuromorphic Spike
Encoding
Authors: Ahmad El Ferdaoussi, Eric Plourde, Jean Rouat
ID: 2412.08816
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.08816

Abstract:
Neuromorphic applications emulate the processing performed by the brain by using
spikes as inputs instead of time-varying analog stimuli. Therefore, these time-
varying stimuli have to be encoded into spikes, which can induce important
information loss. To alleviate this loss, some studies use population coding
strategies to encode more information using a population of neurons rather than
just one neuron. However, configuring the encoding parameters of such a
population is an open research question. This work proposes an approach based on
maximizing the mutual information between the signal and the spikes in the
population of neurons. The proposed algorithm is inspired by the information-
theoretic framework of Partial Information Decomposition. Two applications are
presented: blood pressure pulse wave classification, and neural action potential
waveform classification. In both tasks, the data is encoded into spikes and the
encoding parameters of the neuron populations are tuned to maximize the encoded
information using the proposed algorithm. The spikes are then classified and the
performance is measured using classification accuracy as a metric. Two key
results are reported. Firstly, adding neurons to the population leads to an
increase in both mutual information and classification accuracy beyond what
could be accounted for by each neuron separately, showing the usefulness of
population coding strategies. Secondly, the classification accuracy obtained
with the tuned parameters is near-optimal and it closely follows the mutual
information as more neurons are added to the population. Furthermore, the
proposed approach significantly outperforms random parameter selection, showing
the usefulness of the proposed approach. These results are reproduced in both
applications.
