Title: The Generative AI Ethics Playbook
Authors: Jessie J. Smith, Wesley Hanwen Deng, William H. Smith, Maarten Sap,
Nicole DeCario, Jesse Dodge
ID: 2501.10383
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.10383

Abstract:
The Generative AI Ethics Playbook provides guidance for identifying and
mitigating risks of machine learning systems across various domains, including
natural language processing, computer vision, and generative AI. This playbook
aims to assist practitioners in diagnosing potential harms that may arise during
the design, development, and deployment of datasets and models. It offers
concrete strategies and resources for mitigating these risks, to help minimize
negative impacts on users and society. Drawing on current best practices in both
research and ethical considerations, this playbook aims to serve as a
comprehensive resource for AI/ML practitioners. The intended audience of this
playbook includes machine learning researchers, engineers, and practitioners who
are involved in the creation and implementation of generative and multimodal
models (e.g., text-to-text, image-to-image, text-to-image, text-to-video).
  Specifically, we provide transparency/documentation checklists, topics of
interest, common questions, examples of harms through case studies, and
resources and strategies to mitigate harms throughout the Generative AI
lifecycle. This playbook was made collaboratively over the course of 16 months
through extensive literature review of over 100 resources and peer-reviewed
articles, as well as through an initial group brainstorming session with 18
interdisciplinary AI ethics experts from industry and academia, and with
additional feedback from 8 experts (5 of whom were in the initial brainstorming
session).
  We note that while this playbook provides examples, discussion, and harm
mitigation strategies, research in this area is ongoing. Our playbook aims to be
a practically useful survey, taking a high-level view rather than aiming for
covering the entire existing body of research.
