Title: Deterministic Model of Incremental Multi-Agent Boltzmann Q-Learning:
Transient Cooperation, Metastability, and Oscillations
Authors: David Goll, Jobst Heitzig, Wolfram Barfuss
ID: 2501.00160
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.00160

Abstract:
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning involves agents that learn together in a
shared environment, leading to emergent dynamics sensitive to initial conditions
and parameter variations. A Dynamical Systems approach, which studies the
evolution of multi-component systems over time, has uncovered some of the
underlying dynamics by constructing deterministic approximation models of
stochastic algorithms. In this work, we demonstrate that even in the simplest
case of independent Q-learning with a Boltzmann exploration policy, significant
discrepancies arise between the actual algorithm and previous approximations. We
elaborate why these models actually approximate interesting variants rather than
the original incremental algorithm. To explain the discrepancies, we introduce a
new discrete-time approximation model that explicitly accounts for agents'
update frequencies within the learning process and show that its dynamics
fundamentally differ from the simplified dynamics of prior models. We illustrate
the usefulness of our approach by applying it to the question of spontaneous
cooperation in social dilemmas, specifically the Prisoner's Dilemma as the
simplest case study. We identify conditions under which the learning behaviour
appears as long-term stable cooperation from an external perspective. However,
our model shows that this behaviour is merely a metastable transient phase and
not a true equilibrium, making it exploitable. We further exemplify how specific
parameter settings can significantly exacerbate the moving target problem in
independent learning. Through a systematic analysis of our model, we show that
increasing the discount factor induces oscillations, preventing convergence to a
joint policy. These oscillations arise from a supercritical Neimark-Sacker
bifurcation, which transforms the unique stable fixed point into an unstable
focus surrounded by a stable limit cycle.
