Title: Critical Evaluation of Studies Alleging Evidence for Technosignatures in
the POSS1-E Photographic Plates
Authors: Wesley Andrés Watters, Laura Dominé, Sarah Little, Cameron Pratt, Kevin
H. Knuth
ID: 2601.21946
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.21946

Abstract:
Recent studies by B. Villarroel and colleagues have assembled and analyzed
datasets of unidentified features measured from digital scans of photographic
plates captured by the first-epoch Palomar Observatory Sky Survey (POSS1) in the
pre-Sputnik era. These studies have called attention to (i) a purported deficit
of features within Earth's shadow; (ii) the sporadic presence of linear
clusters; and (iii) a positive correlation between the timing of feature
observations and nuclear tests as well as Unidentified Aerial Phenomena (UAP)
sighting reports. These observations were cited as evidence that some fraction
of the unidentified features represent glinting artificial objects near Earth.
We have examined these claims using two related, previously published datasets.
When analyzing the most vetted of these, we do not observe the reported deficit
in the terrestrial shadow. We determine that a third of the features in the
reported linear clusters were not confidently distinguished from catalog stars.
We find that the reported correlation between the timing of feature observations
and nuclear tests becomes insignificant after properly normalizing by the number
of observation days, and is almost completely determined by the observation
schedule of the Palomar telescope. We uncover important inconsistencies in the
definitions of the datasets used in these studies, as well as the use of
unvalidated datasets containing catalog stars, scan artifacts, and plate
defects. It has not been shown that any of the features in these datasets
represent optical transients. We examine the spatial distribution of the plate-
derived features, finding an overall gradual increase in number density toward
the corners and edges of plates, as well as examples of (i) empty north-south
strips that span multiple plates; (ii) clusters and voids having geometric
shapes; and (iii) amorphous clusters.
