Title: Habitable Worlds Observatory Living Worlds Working Group: Surface
Biosignatures on Potentially Habitable Exoplanets
Authors: Niki Parenteau, Anna Grace Ulses, Connor Metz, Nancy Y. Kiang, Ligia F.
Coelho, Edward Schwieterman, Jonathan Grone, Giulia Roccetti, Svetlana
Berdyugina, Eleonora Alei, Lucas Patty, Emilie Lafleche, Taro Matsuo, Dawn
Cardace, Schuyler Borges, Avi Mandel, Kenneth Gordon, Joshua Krissansen-Totton,
Giada Arney
ID: 2601.08883
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.08883

Abstract:
The Habitable Worlds Observatory (HWO) is the first NASA Astrophysics flagship
mission with a key science goal of searching for signs of life on rocky
habitable exoplanets beyond our solar system. The Living Worlds Community
Working Group was charged with investigating how HWO could characterize planets
orbiting stars in the solar neighborhood, search for signs of life, and
interpret potential biosignatures within a false positive and false negative
framework. The Surface Biosignatures Task assessed the measurement requirements
and instrument needs to detect these biosignatures under an 'Earth through time'
scenario. Surface biosignatures are planetary-scale spectral features resulting
from absorption and/or scattering of radiation by organisms containing
photosynthetic and non-photosynthetic pigments. This secondary class of
biosignature can be used to corroborate atmospheric biosignatures by providing
multiple lines of evidence to aid in assessing their biogenicity. Furthermore,
surface biopigments are the only way to detect more primitive forms of
anoxygenic photosynthesis if oxygenic photosynthesis never evolved. Key
Findings: To detect biopigments on the surface of planets under Archean,
Proterozoic, and Modern atmospheric compositions (15 percent coverage, 50
percent cloud cover), an SNR of 20-40 would be needed over 500-1100 nm. However,
there may be some cases in which lower SNR is required; studies are ongoing.
Coronagraph requirements: (1) The detection of surface biosignatures would be
greatly enhanced by having as many parallel coronagraph channels as possible
across the entire wavelength range with no or minimal gaps between channels. (2)
Retrieval studies revealed that restricted wavelength ranges (e.g., 0.4 - 0.7
microns), such as may be used during initial survey strategies, are not
sufficient to deconvolve the biopigment features from the abiotic background.
