Title: Machine Learning-Driven Creep Law Discovery Across Alloy Compositional
Space
Authors: Hongshun Chen, Ryan Zhou, Rujing Zha, Zihan Chen, Wenpan Li, Rowan
Rolark, John Patrick Reidy, Jian Cao, Ping Guo, David C. Dunand, Horacio D.
Espinosa
ID: 2601.08970
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.08970

Abstract:
Hihg-temperature creep characterization of structural alloys traditionally
relies on serial uniaxial tests, which are highly inefficient for exploring the
large search space of alloy compositions and for material discovery. Here, we
introduce a machine-learning-assisted, high-throughput framework for creep law
identification based on a dimple array bulge instrument (DABI) configuration,
which enables parallel creep testing of 25 dimples, each fabricated from a
different alloy, in a single experiment. Full-field surface displacements of
dimples undergoing time-dependent creep-induced bulging under inert gas pressure
are measured by 3D digital image correlation. We train a recurrent neural
network (RNN) as a surrogate model, mapping creep parameters and loading
conditions to the time-dependent deformation response of DABI. Coupling this
surrogate with a particle swarm optimization scheme enables rapid and global
inverse identification with sparsity regularization of creep parameters from
experiment displacement-time histories. In addition, we propose a
phenomenological creep law with a time-dependent stress exponent that captures
the sigmoidal primary creep observed in wrought INCONEL 625 and extracts its
temperature dependence from DABI test at multiple temperatures. Furthermore, we
employ a general creep law combining several conventional forms together with
regularized inversion to identify the creep laws for 47 additional Fe-, Ni-, and
Co-rich alloys and to automatically select the dominant functional form for each
alloy. This workflow combined with DABI experiment provides a quantitative,
high-throughput creep characterization platform that is compatible with data
mining, composition-property modeling, and nonlinear structural optimization
with creep behavior across a large alloy design space.
