Title: Single- and Multi-Objective Stochastic Optimization for Next-Generation
Networks in the Generative AI and Quantum Computing Era
Authors: Trinh Van Chien, Bui Trong Duc, Nguyen Xuan Tung, Van Duc Nguyen, Waqas
Khalid, Symeon Chatzinotas, Lajos Hanzo
ID: 2601.02175
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.02175

Abstract:
Next Generation (NG) networks move beyond simply connecting devices to creating
an ecosystem of connected intelligence, especially with the support of
generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) and quantum computation. These systems
are expected to handle large-scale deployments and high-density networks with
diverse functionalities. As a result, there is an increasing demand for
efficient and intelligent algorithms that can operate under uncertainty from
both propagation environments and networking systems. Traditional optimization
methods often depend on accurate theoretical models of data transmission, but in
real-world NG scenarios, they suffer from high computational complexity in
large-scale settings. Stochastic Optimization (SO) algorithms, designed to
accommodate extremely high density and extensive network scalability, have
emerged as a powerful solution for optimizing wireless networks. This includes
various categories that range from model-based approaches to learning-based
approaches. These techniques are capable of converging within a feasible time
frame while addressing complex, large-scale optimization problems. However,
there is currently limited research on SO applied for NG networks, especially
the upcoming Sixth-Generation (6G). In this survey, we emphasize the
relationship between NG systems and SO by eight open questions involving the
background, key features, and lesson learned. Overall, our study starts by
providing a detailed overview of both areas, covering fundamental and widely
used SO techniques, spanning from single to multi-objective signal processing.
Next, we explore how different algorithms can solve NG challenges, such as load
balancing, optimizing energy efficiency, improving spectral efficiency, or
handling multiple performance trade-offs. Lastly, we highlight the challenges in
the current research and propose new directions for future studies.
