Title: Subregion algebras in classical and quantum gravity
Authors: Venkatesa Chandrasekaran, Éanna É. Flanagan
ID: 2601.07915
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.07915

Abstract:
We study the kinematics and dynamics of subregion algebras in classical and
perturbative quantum gravity associated with portions of null surfaces such as
event horizons and finite causal diamonds. We construct half-sided
supertranslation generators by extending subregion phase spaces of the event
horizon to include doubled pairs of corner edge modes obtained from splitting
the horizon, namely relative boosts and null translations of the respective
corners. These edge modes carry a corner symplectic form and give rise to
canonical charges generating half-sided boosts and translations. We show that
the null translation generator is necessarily two-sided in the complementary
translation edge modes. The charges act nontrivially on gravitationally dressed
local observables on the horizon, such that the horizon subalgebra naturally
takes the form of a crossed product by the associated automorphism group.
Quantizing the extended phase space after linearizing around a black hole
background, we obtain for each horizon cut a Type II$_{\infty}$ von Neumann
algebra equipped with a trace, whose von Neumann entropy coincides with the
generalized entropy of that cut. The integrability of the half-sided null
translation generator lifts to the existence of a self-adjoint operator that
implements null time evolution on the Type II$_\infty$ horizon subalgebras. The
area operator is identified as the bulk implementation of the Connes cocycle
flow for one-sided observables in excited states. The nesting property of the
resulting one-parameter family of horizon subalgebras implies a generalized
second law for non-stationary linearized perturbations of Killing horizons.
Lastly, we use gravitational half-sided modular inclusion algebras to prove the
quantum focusing conjecture in the perturbative quantum gravity regime.
