Title: Learning Latent Action World Models In The Wild
Authors: Quentin Garrido, Tushar Nagarajan, Basile Terver, Nicolas Ballas, Yann
LeCun, Michael Rabbat
ID: 2601.05230
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.05230

Abstract:
Agents capable of reasoning and planning in the real world require the ability
of predicting the consequences of their actions. While world models possess this
capability, they most often require action labels, that can be complex to obtain
at scale. This motivates the learning of latent action models, that can learn an
action space from videos alone. Our work addresses the problem of learning
latent actions world models on in-the-wild videos, expanding the scope of
existing works that focus on simple robotics simulations, video games, or
manipulation data. While this allows us to capture richer actions, it also
introduces challenges stemming from the video diversity, such as environmental
noise, or the lack of a common embodiment across videos. To address some of the
challenges, we discuss properties that actions should follow as well as relevant
architectural choices and evaluations. We find that continuous, but constrained,
latent actions are able to capture the complexity of actions from in-the-wild
videos, something that the common vector quantization does not. We for example
find that changes in the environment coming from agents, such as humans entering
the room, can be transferred across videos. This highlights the capability of
learning actions that are specific to in-the-wild videos. In the absence of a
common embodiment across videos, we are mainly able to learn latent actions that
become localized in space, relative to the camera. Nonetheless, we are able to
train a controller that maps known actions to latent ones, allowing us to use
latent actions as a universal interface and solve planning tasks with our world
model with similar performance as action-conditioned baselines. Our analyses and
experiments provide a step towards scaling latent action models to the real
world.
