Title: A self-evolving multi-role collaborative framework with fine-grained
difficulty guidance for innovative mathematical problem generation
Authors: Yifei Sun, Yongan Li, A. K. Qin, Sicheng Hou, Tamas Pflanzner
ID: 2601.11792
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.11792

Abstract:
Mathematical problem generation (MPG) is a significant research direction in the
field of intelligent education. In recent years, the rapid development of large
language models (LLMs) has enabled new technological approaches to problem-
generation tasks. Although existing LLMs can achieve high correctness rates,
they generally lack innovation and exhibit poor discrimination. In this paper,
we propose the task of innovative math problem generation (IMPG). To solve the
IMPG task, this paper proposes a self-evolving, multi-role collaborative
framework with fine-grained difficulty guidance. First, a multi-role
collaborative mechanism comprising a sampler, generator, evaluator, state
machine, and memory is constructed, ensuring the correctness of generated
problems through iterative optimization informed by self-assessment and external
feedback. Second, we introduce an improved difficulty model to quantify
difficulty and provide fine-grained guidance. We adopt the data-driven
association-guided path sampling (DAPS) algorithm to enhance the semantic
rationality of sampled encodings. Third, we construct the HSM3K-CN dataset,
which comprises high-quality high school math problems. A multi-stage training
pipeline is adopted, incorporating continual pre-training (CPT), supervised
fine-tuning (SFT), and group relative policy optimization (GRPO), to enhance the
generation and evaluation capabilities of the base model. Finally, system self-
evolution is achieved by transferring evaluation capabilities from the expert
model to the apprentice model via distillation. Experiments show that, compared
to baseline models, our proposed method significantly improves the innovation of
the generated problems while maintaining a high correctness rate.
