Title: Algorithmic Information Theory for Graph Edge Grouping and Substructure
Analysis
Authors: Gabriel Potestades
ID: 2601.01760
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.01760

Abstract:
Understanding natural phenomenon through the interactions of different complex
systems has become an increasing focus in scientific inquiry. Defining
complexity and actually measuring it is an ongoing debate and no standard
framework has been established that is both theoretically sound and
computationally practical to use. Currently, one of the fields which attempts to
formally define complexity is in the realm of Algorithmic Information Theory.
The field has shown advances by studying the complexity values of binary strings
and 2-dimensional binary matrices using 1-dimensional and 2-dimensional Turing
machines, respectively. Using these complexity values, an algorithm called the
Block Decomposition Method developed by Zenil, et al. in 2018, has been created
to approximate the complexity of adjacency matrices of graphs which have found
relative success in grouping graphs based on their complexity values. We use
this method along with another method called edge perturbation to exhaustively
determine if an edge can be identified to connect two subgraphs within a graph
using the entire symmetric group of its vertices permutation and via unique
permutations we call automorphic subsets, which are a special subset of the
symmetric group. We also analyze if edges will be grouped closer to their
respective subgraphs in terms of the average algorithmic information
contribution. This analysis ascertains if Algorithmic Information Theory can
serve as a viable theory for understanding graph substructures and as a
foundation for frameworks measuring and analyzing complexity. The study found
that the connecting edge was successfully identified as having the highest
average information contribution in 29 out of 30 graphs, and in 16 of these, the
distance to the next edge was greater than log_2(2). Furthermore, the symmetric
group outperformed automorphic subsets in edge grouping.
