Title: Wow, wo, val! A Comprehensive Embodied World Model Evaluation Turing Test
Authors: Chun-Kai Fan, Xiaowei Chi, Xiaozhu Ju, Hao Li, Yong Bao, Yu-Kai Wang,
Lizhang Chen, Zhiyuan Jiang, Kuangzhi Ge, Ying Li, Weishi Mi, Qingpo Wuwu,
Peidong Jia, Yulin Luo, Kevin Zhang, Zhiyuan Qin, Yong Dai, Sirui Han, Yike Guo,
Shanghang Zhang, Jian Tang
ID: 2601.04137
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.04137

Abstract:
As world models gain momentum in Embodied AI, an increasing number of works
explore using video foundation models as predictive world models for downstream
embodied tasks like 3D prediction or interactive generation. However, before
exploring these downstream tasks, video foundation models still have two
critical questions unanswered: (1) whether their generative generalization is
sufficient to maintain perceptual fidelity in the eyes of human observers, and
(2) whether they are robust enough to serve as a universal prior for real-world
embodied agents. To provide a standardized framework for answering these
questions, we introduce the Embodied Turing Test benchmark: WoW-World-Eval
(Wow,wo,val). Building upon 609 robot manipulation data, Wow-wo-val examines
five core abilities, including perception, planning, prediction, generalization,
and execution. We propose a comprehensive evaluation protocol with 22 metrics to
assess the models' generation ability, which achieves a high Pearson Correlation
between the overall score and human preference (>0.93) and establishes a
reliable foundation for the Human Turing Test. On Wow-wo-val, models achieve
only 17.27 on long-horizon planning and at best 68.02 on physical consistency,
indicating limited spatiotemporal consistency and physical reasoning. For the
Inverse Dynamic Model Turing Test, we first use an IDM to evaluate the video
foundation models' execution accuracy in the real world. However, most models
collapse to $\approx$ 0% success, while WoW maintains a 40.74% success rate.
These findings point to a noticeable gap between the generated videos and the
real world, highlighting the urgency and necessity of benchmarking World Model
in Embodied AI.
