Title: Full Disclosure, Less Trust? How the Level of Detail about AI Use in News
Writing Affects Readers' Trust
Authors: Pooja Prajod, Hannes Cools, Thomas Röggla, Karthikeya Puttur Venkatraj,
Amber Kusters, Alia ElKattan, Pablo Cesar, Abdallah El Ali
ID: 2601.09620
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.09620

Abstract:
As artificial intelligence (AI) is increasingly integrated into news production,
calls for transparency about the use of AI have gained considerable traction.
Recent studies suggest that AI disclosures can lead to a ``transparency
dilemma'', where disclosure reduces readers' trust. However, little is known
about how the \textit{level of detail} in AI disclosures influences trust and
contributes to this dilemma within the news context. In this 3$\times$2$\times$2
mixed factorial study with 40 participants, we investigate how three levels of
AI disclosures (none, one-line, detailed) across two types of news (politics and
lifestyle) and two levels of AI involvement (low and high) affect news readers'
trust. We measured trust using the News Media Trust questionnaire, along with
two decision behaviors: source-checking and subscription decisions.
Questionnaire responses and subscription rates showed a decline in trust only
for detailed AI disclosures, whereas source-checking behavior increased for both
one-line and detailed disclosures, with the effect being more pronounced for
detailed disclosures. Insights from semi-structured interviews suggest that
source-checking behavior was primarily driven by interest in the topic, followed
by trust, whereas trust was the main factor influencing subscription decisions.
Around two-thirds of participants expressed a preference for detailed
disclosures, while most participants who preferred one-line indicated a need for
detail-on-demand disclosure formats. Our findings show that not all AI
disclosures lead to a transparency dilemma, but instead reflect a trade-off
between readers' desire for more transparency and their trust in AI-assisted
news content.
