Title: Energetics of Rydberg-atom Quantum Computing
Authors: Óscar Alves, Marco Pezzutto, Yasser Omar
ID: 2601.03141
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.03141

Abstract:
Quantum computing exploits the properties of Quantum Mechanics to solve problems
faster than classical computers. The potential applications of this technology
have been widely explored, and extensive research over the past decades has been
dedicated to developing scalable quantum computers. However, the question of the
energetic performance of quantum computation has only gained attention more
recently, and its importance is now recognized. In fact, quantum computers can
only be a viable alternative if their energy cost scales favorably, and some
research has shown that there is even a potential quantum energy advantage.
Rydberg atoms have emerged recently as one of the most promising platforms to
implement a large-scale quantum computer, with significant advances made in
recent years. This work aims at contributing first steps to understand the
energy efficiency of this platform, namely by investigating the energy
consumption of the different elements of a Rydberg atom quantum computer. First,
an experimental implementation of the Quantum Phase Estimation algorithm is
analyzed, and an estimation of the energetic cost of executing this algorithm is
calculated. Then, a potential scaling of the energy cost of performing the
Quantum Fourier Transform with Rydberg atoms is derived. This analysis
facilitates a comparison of the energy consumption of different elements within
a Rydberg atom quantum computer, from the preparation of the atoms to the
execution of the algorithm, and the measurement of the final state, enabling the
evaluation of the energy expenditure of the Rydberg platform and the
identification of potential improvements. Finally, we used the Quantum Fourier
Transform as an energetic benchmark, comparing the scaling we obtained to that
of the execution of the Discrete Fourier Transform in two state-of-the-art
classical supercomputers.
