Title: Learning the relations between neutron star and nuclear matter properties
with symbolic regression
Authors: N. K. Patra, Tuhin Malik, Kai Zhou, Constança Providência
ID: 2601.07727
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.07727

Abstract:
The equation of state (EOS) of dense matter in neutron stars (NSs) remains
uncertain, particularly at supra-nuclear densities where complex nuclear
interactions and the potential presence of exotic matter, like hyperons, come
into play. The complex relationships existing between nuclear matter and neutron
star properties are investigated. The focus is on their nonlinearities and
interdependencies. In our analysis, we apply a machine learning algorithm known
as symbolic regression, paired with principal component analysis, to datasets
generated from Bayesian inference over relativistic mean-field models. A
systematic Principal Component Analysis has allowed to break down the percentage
contribution of each element or feature in the relationships obtained. This
study examines two main models (datasets): the NL model, which includes
nucleonic degrees of freedom; and the NL-hyp model, which includes hyperons in
addition to nucleons. Our analysis confirms a robust correlation between the
tidal deformability of a 1.4 \(M_\odot\) neutron star and $β$-equilibrium
pressure at twice the nuclear saturation density. This correlation remains once
hyperons are included. The contribution of the different nuclear matter
properties at saturation to the radius and tidal deformability was calculated.
It was shown that the isovector properties have the largest impact, with a
contribution of about 90\%. We also studied the relationship between the proton
fraction at different densities and various symmetry energy parameters defined
at saturation density. For the hyperon data set, we took into account the
effects of the negatively charged hyperon $Ξ$ in order to recover the
relationships. Our study reveals the individual impact of various symmetry
energy parameters on proton fractions at different densities.
