Title: Predicting Developer Acceptance of AI-Generated Code Suggestions
Authors: Jing Jiang, Liehao Li, Jinyun Hou, Xin Tan, Li Zhang
ID: 2601.21379
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.21379

Abstract:
AI-assisted programming tools are widely adopted, yet their practical utility is
often undermined by undesired suggestions that interrupt developer workflows and
cause frustration. While existing research has explored developer-AI
interactions when programming qualitatively, a significant gap remains in
quantitative analysis of developers' acceptance of AI-generated code
suggestions, partly because the necessary fine-grained interaction data is often
proprietary. To bridge this gap, this paper conducts an empirical study using
66,329 industrial developer-AI interactions from a large technology company. We
analyze features that are significantly different between accepted code
suggestions and rejected ones. We find that accepted suggestions are
characterized by significantly higher historical acceptance counts and ratios
for both developers and projects, longer generation intervals, shorter preceding
code context in the project, and older IDE versions. Based on these findings, we
introduce CSAP (Code Suggestion Acceptance Prediction) to predict whether a
developer will accept the code suggestion before it is displayed. Our evaluation
of CSAP shows that it achieves the accuracy of 0.973 and 0.922 on imbalanced and
balanced dataset respectively. Compared to a large language model baseline and
an in-production industrial filter, CSAP relatively improves the accuracy by
12.6\% and 69.5\% on imbalanced dataset, and improves the accuracy by 87.0\% and
140.1\% on balanced dataset. Our results demonstrate that targeted
personalization is a powerful approach for filtering out code suggestions with
predicted rejection and reduce developer interruption. To the best of our
knowledge, it is the first quantitative study of code suggestion acceptance on
large-scale industrial data, and this work also sheds light on an important
research direction of AI-assisted programming.
