Title: Exoplanet characterization with NASA's Habitable Worlds Observatory
Authors: Joanna K. Barstow, Beth Biller, Mei Ting Mak, Sarah Rugheimer, Amaury
Triaud, Hannah R. Wakeford
ID: 2601.06233
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.06233

Abstract:
Exoplanet atmosphere characterization has seen revolutionary advances over the
last few years, providing us with unique insights into atmospheric chemistry,
dynamics and planet formation mechanisms. However, true solar system analog
planets remain inaccessible. A major goal for exoplanet science over the coming
decades is to observe, and characterize, temperate rocky planets and cool gas
giants in orbit around solar-type stars, with the prospect of detecting signs of
habitability or even life. Characterization and categorization of these planets
relies on direct spectroscopic observations capable of identifying molecular
species in their atmospheres; however, these observations represent a
substantial engineering challenge due to the extreme contrast between a
temperate, Earth-sized exoplanet and its parent star. NASA's next flagship
mission, the Habitable Worlds Observatory (HWO) - planned for launch in the
mid-2040s - will boast a coronagraphic instrument capable of reaching the needed
10$^{-10}$ contrast, on an ultrastable platform enabling long integration times
to achieve the required signal to noise. HWO will cover near-ultraviolet to the
near-infrared wavelengths, enabling detections of key biosignature molecules and
habitability indicators such as ocean glint and a vegetation `red edge'. Via
early involvement in this groundbreaking observatory, including a potential UK
instrument contribution, the UK exoplanet community now has an important
opportunity to influence the telescope's design. To maintain our international
competitiveness, we must be at the forefront of observational campaigns with HWO
when it eventually launches, and this comes with the need for parallel
development in laboratory astrophysics and computational modelling. Maximising
our exploitation of this transformative NASA mission requires consistent
financial support in these areas across the next two decades.
