Title: Neuro-symbolic AI for Predictive Maintenance (PdM) -- review and
recommendations
Authors: Kyle Hamilton, Muhammad Intizar Ali
ID: 2602.00731
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.00731

Abstract:
In this document we perform a systematic review of the State-of-the-art in
Predictive Maintenance (PdM) over the last five years in industrial settings
such as commercial buildings, pharmaceutical facilities, or semi-conductor
manufacturing. In general, data-driven methods such as those based on deep
learning, exhibit higher accuracy than traditional knowledge-based systems.
These systems however, are not without significant limitations. The need for
large labeled data sets, a lack of generalizability to new environments (out-of-
distribution generalization), and a lack of transparency at inference time are
some of the obstacles to adoption in real world environments. In contrast,
traditional approaches based on domain expertise in the form of rules, logic or
first principles suffer from poor accuracy, many false positives and a need for
ongoing expert supervision and manual tuning. While the majority of approaches
in recent literature utilize some form of data-driven architecture, there are
hybrid systems which also take into account domain specific knowledge. Such
hybrid systems have the potential to overcome the weaknesses of either approach
on its own while preserving their strengths. We propose taking the hybrid
approach even further and integrating deep learning with symbolic logic, or
Neuro-symbolic AI, to create more accurate, explainable, interpretable, and
robust systems. We describe several neuro-symbolic architectures and examine
their strengths and limitations within the PdM domain. We focus specifically on
methods which involve the use of sensor data and manually crafted rules as
inputs by describing concrete NeSy architectures. In short, this survey outlines
the context of modern maintenance, defines key concepts, establishes a
generalized framework, reviews current modeling approaches and challenges, and
introduces the proposed focus on Neuro-symbolic AI (NESY).
