Title: Examining Fast Radiative Feedbacks Using Machine-Learning Weather
Emulators
Authors: Ankur Mahesh, William D. Collins, Travis A. O'Brien, Paul B. Goddard,
Sinclaire Zebaze, Shashank Subramanian, James P. C. Duncan, Oliver Watt-Meyer,
Boris Bonev, Thorsten Kurth, Karthik Kashinath, Michael S. Pritchard, Da Yang
ID: 2602.16090
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.16090

Abstract:
The response of the climate system to increased greenhouse gases and other
radiative perturbations is governed by a combination of fast and slow feedbacks.
Slow feedbacks are typically activated in response to changes in ocean
temperatures on decadal timescales and manifest as changes in climatic state
with no recent historical analogue. However, fast feedbacks are activated in
response to rapid atmospheric physical processes on weekly timescales, and they
are already operative in the present-day climate. This distinction implies that
the physics of fast radiative feedbacks is present in the historical
meteorological reanalyses used to train many recent successful machine-learning-
based (ML) emulators of weather and climate. In addition, these feedbacks are
functional under the historical boundary conditions pertaining to the top-of-
atmosphere radiative balance and sea-surface temperatures. Together, these
factors imply that we can use historically trained ML weather emulators to study
the response of radiative-convective equilibrium (RCE), and hence the global
hydrological cycle, to perturbations in carbon dioxide and other well-mixed
greenhouse gases. Without retraining on prospective Earth system conditions, we
use ML weather emulators to quantify the fast precipitation response to reduced
and elevated carbon dioxed concentrations with no recent historical precedent.
We show that the responses from historically trained emulators agree with those
produced by full-physics Earth System Models (ESMs). In conclusion, we discuss
the prospects for and advantages from using ESMs and ML emulators to study fast
processes in global climate.
