Title: Machine Learning-Ready Data Sets for the Analysis and Nowcasting of
Atmospheric Radiation at Aviation Altitudes
Authors: Viacheslav M Sadykov, Zachary M Watkins, Dustin Kempton, William Jones,
Sanjib K C, Griffin T Goodwin, Xiaochun He, W Kent Tobiska, Irina Kitiashvili,
Christopher Mertens, Shubha Ranjan, D Glenn Deardorff, Ryan Spaulding
ID: 2602.07108
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.07108

Abstract:
Nowcasting and forecasting of the radiation environment in the Earth's lower
atmosphere are critical for the safety of aircraft and spacecraft crews and
passengers. Currently, this problem is addressed by employing statistical and
physics-based models that take into account particle transport and
precipitation. However, given the increased number of radiation measurements
available to the community, it is possible to start developing data-driven
approaches. We prepared Machine Learning-ready (ML-ready) datasets to nowcast
the effective dose rates at aviation altitudes. The presented datasets contain
92,476 individual measurements from 589 flights obtained by the Automated
Radiation Measurements for Aerospace Safety (ARMAS) experiment from 2013 to
2023. The ARMAS measurements are augmented with the properties of the Geospace
environment, such as solar soft X-ray and proton fluxes, solar wind properties,
secondary cosmic ray neutrons, space weather indexes, and global solar activity
indicators (such as daily sunspot number). ARMAS data are separated into three
partitions, ensuring that (1) the data points from a single flight remain within
the same partition, and (2) each partition samples the flight locations and
Geospace environment conditions equally. Several versions of the datasets allow
predictions based on point-in-time measurements and use up to 24 hours of
Geospace parameter history. The test of the use case demonstrates a possibility
of nowcasting ARMAS measurements with accuracies slightly better than the
considered physics-based models. The publicly available ML-ready datasets could
serve as the first step in data preparation for ML-driven nowcasting and
forecasting of the radiation environment.
