Title: Universal Sample Complexity Bounds in Quantum Learning Theory via Fisher
Information Matrix
Authors: Hyukgun Kwon, Seok Hyung Lie, Liang Jiang
ID: 2602.21510
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.21510

Abstract:
In this work, we show that the sample complexity required in quantum learning
theory within a general parametric framework, is fundamentally governed by the
inverse Fisher information matrix. More specifically, we derive upper and lower
bounds on the number of samples required to estimate the parameters of a quantum
system within a prescribed small additive error, with high success probability
under maximum likelihood estimation. The upper bound is governed by the supremum
of the largest diagonal entry of the inverse Fisher information matrix, while
the lower bound is characterized by any diagonal element evaluated at arbitrary
parameter values. We then apply the general bounds to Pauli channel learning and
to Pauli expectation values learning in the asymptotic small-error regime, and
recover the previously established sample complexity through considerably
streamlined derivations. Furthermore, we identify the structural origin of
exponential sample complexity in Pauli channel learning without entanglement and
in Pauli expectation values learning without quantum memory. We then extend the
analysis to an error criterion based on the Euclidean distance between the true
parameter values and their estimators. We derive the corresponding upper and
lower bounds on the sample complexity, which are likewise characterized by the
inverse Fisher information matrix. As an application, we consider Pauli channel
learning with entangled probes. Finally, we highlight two fundamental
contributions to quantum learning theory. First, we establish a systematic
framework that determines the task-independent sample complexity under maximum-
likelihood estimation. Second, we show that, in the small-error regime, the
learning sample complexity is determined by the inverse Fisher information
matrix, the central quantity in quantum metrology that determines the ultimate
achievable mean squared error.
