Title: Solar active region scaling laws revisited
Authors: Guilherme A. L. Nogueira, Robertus Erdelyi, Ruihui Wang, Kristof
Petrovay
ID: 2602.13677
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.13677

Abstract:
The systematic variation of solar active region (AR) properties with their
magnetic flux has been the subject of numerous studies but the proposed scaling
laws still vary rather widely. A correct representation of these laws and the
deviations from them is important for modelling the source term in surface flux
transport and dynamo models of space climate variation, and it may also help
constrain the subsurface origin of active regions. Here we determine active
region scaling laws based on the recently constructed ARISE active region data
base listing bipolar ARs for cycle 23, 24 and 25. For the area $A$, pole
separation $d$ and tilt angle $γ$ we find scalings against magnetic flux $Φ$ and
heliographic latitude $λ$. Residuals from these relations are also modelled.
These scaling relations are recommended for use in space climate research for
the modelling of future data or missing past data, as well as for the
identification of candidate rogue ARs. We confirm that the tilt angle
distribution of non-Hale ARs shows a significant excess at low tilts (anti-Hale
ARs). In contrast to earlier studies we show that neither the anti-Hale ARs nor
non-Hales in general follow Joy's law: instead, their tilt angle distribution is
best represented by vanishing mean tilt. These results are most easily
reconciled with a scenario where the AR flux loops originate in the deep
convective zone or below, gaining tilt during their rise under the action of the
Coriolis force. A small fraction of the loops is subjected to extreme,
intermittent torques resulting in either very large tilts or anti-Hale
orientation. Anti-Hale ARs are suggested to be fully curled `XO-loops', and
their excess is caused by a simple mechanical effect, as the contact of their
legs increases resistance against further deformation by the torque.
