Title: Predicting galaxy bias using machine learning
Authors: Catalina Riveros-Jara, Antonio D. Montero-Dorta, Natália V. N.
Rodrigues, Pía Amigo, Natalí S. M. de Santi, Andrés Balaguera-Antolínez, Raul
Abramo, Neill Guzmán, M. Celeste Artale
ID: 2602.05881
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.05881

Abstract:
Understanding how galaxies trace the underlying matter density field is
essential for characterizing the influence of the large-scale structure on
galaxy formation, being therefore a key ingredient in observational cosmology.
This connection, commonly described through the galaxy bias, $b$, can be studied
effectively using machine learning (ML) techniques, which offer strong
predictive capabilities and can capture non-linear relationships. We aim to
incorporate the linear bias parameter assigned to individual galaxies into a ML
framework, quantify its dependence on various halo and environmental properties,
and evaluate whether different algorithms can accurately predict this parameter
and reproduce the scatter in several bias relations. We use data from the
IllustrisTNG300 simulation, including the distance to different cosmic-web
structures computed with DisPerSE. These data are complemented with an object-
by-object estimator of the large-scale linear bias ($b_i$), providing the
individual contribution of each galaxy to the bias of the entire population. Our
ML framework uses three models to predict $b_i$: a Random Forest Regressor, a
Neural Network and a probabilistic method (Normalizing Flows). We recover the
full hierarchy of galaxy bias dependencies, showing that the most informative
features are the overdensities, particularly $δ_8$, followed by the distances to
cosmic-web structures and selected internal halo properties, most notably
$z_{1/2}$. We also demonstrate that Normalizing Flows clearly outperform
deterministic methods in predicting galaxy bias, including its joint
distributions with galaxy properties, owing to their ability to capture the
intrinsic variance associated with the stochastic nature of the matter-halo-
galaxy connection. Our ML framework provides a foundation for future efforts to
measure individual bias with upcoming spectroscopic surveys.
