Title: Machine learning enhanced data assimilation framework for multiscale
carbonate rock characterization
Authors: Zhenkai Bo, Ahmed H. Elsheikh, Hannah P. Menke, Julien Maes, Sebastian
Geiger, Muhammad Z. Kashim, Zainol A. A. Bakar, Kamaljit Singh
ID: 2602.06989
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.06989

Abstract:
Carbonate reservoirs offer significant capacity for subsurface carbon storage,
oil production, and underground hydrogen storage. X-ray computed tomography
(X-ray CT) coupled with numerical simulations is commonly used to investigate
the multiphase flow behaviors in carbonate rocks. Carbonates exhibit pore size
distribution across scales, hindering the comprehensive investigation with
conventional X-ray CT images. Imaging samples at both macro and micro-scales
(multi-scale imaging) proved to be a viable option in this context. However,
multi-scale imaging faces two key limitations: the trade-off between field of
view and voxel size necessitates resource-intensive imaging, while multi-scale
multi-physics numerical simulations on resulting digital models incur
prohibitive computational costs. To address these challenges, we propose a
machine learning-enhanced data assimilation framework that leverages
experimental drainage relative permeability measurements to achieve efficient
characterization of micro-scale structures, delivering a data-driven solution
toward a high-fidelity multiscale digital rock modeling. We train a dense neural
network (DNN) as a proxy to a multi-scale pore network simulator and couple it
with an ensemble smoother with multiple data assimilation (ESMDA) algorithm.
DNN-ESMDA framework simultaneously infers the CO2-brine drainage relative
permeability of microporosity phases with associated uncertainty estimation,
revealing the relative importance of each rock phase and guiding future
characterization. Our DNN-ESMDA framework achieves a computational speedup,
reducing inference time from thousands of hours to seconds compared with the
usage of conventional multiscale numerical simulation. Given this computational
efficiency and applicability, the machine learning-enhanced ESMDA framework
presents a generalizable approach for characterizing multiscale carbonate rocks.
