Title: Scaling Laws for Embedding Dimension in Information Retrieval
Authors: Julian Killingback, Mahta Rafiee, Madine Manas, Hamed Zamani
ID: 2602.05062
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.05062

Abstract:
Dense retrieval, which encodes queries and documents into a single dense vector,
has become the dominant neural retrieval approach due to its simplicity and
compatibility with fast approximate nearest neighbor algorithms. As the tasks
dense retrieval performs grow in complexity, the fundamental limitations of the
underlying data structure and similarity metric -- namely vectors and inner-
products -- become more apparent. Prior recent work has shown theoretical
limitations inherent to single vectors and inner-products that are generally
tied to the embedding dimension. Given the importance of embedding dimension for
retrieval capacity, understanding how dense retrieval performance changes as
embedding dimension is scaled is fundamental to building next generation
retrieval models that balance effectiveness and efficiency. In this work, we
conduct a comprehensive analysis of the relationship between embedding dimension
and retrieval performance. Our experiments include two model families and a
range of model sizes from each to construct a detailed picture of embedding
scaling behavior. We find that the scaling behavior fits a power law, allowing
us to derive scaling laws for performance given only embedding dimension, as
well as a joint law accounting for embedding dimension and model size. Our
analysis shows that for evaluation tasks aligned with the training task,
performance continues to improve as embedding size increases, though with
diminishing returns. For evaluation data that is less aligned with the training
task, we find that performance is less predictable, with performance degrading
with larger embedding dimensions for certain tasks. We hope our work provides
additional insight into the limitations of embeddings and their behavior as well
as offers a practical guide for selecting model and embedding dimension to
achieve optimal performance with reduced storage and compute costs.
