Title: EmpiRE-Compass: A Neuro-Symbolic Dashboard for Sustainable and Dynamic
Knowledge Exploration, Synthesis, and Reuse
Authors: Oliver Karras, Amirreza Alasti, Lena John, Sushant Aggarwal, Yücel
Celik
ID: 2602.22276
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.22276

Abstract:
Software engineering (SE) and requirements engineering (RE) face a significant
increase in secondary studies, particularly literature reviews (LRs), due to the
ever-growing number of scientific publications. Generative artificial
intelligence (GenAI) exacerbates this trend by producing LRs rapidly but often
at the expense of quality, rigor, and transparency. At the same time, secondary
studies often fail to share underlying data and artifacts, limiting replication
and reuse. This paper introduces EmpiRE-Compass, a neuro-symbolic dashboard
designed to lower barriers for accessing, replicating, and reusing LR data. Its
overarching goal is to demonstrate how LRs can become more sustainable by
semantically structuring their underlying data in research knowledge graphs
(RKGs) and by leveraging large language models (LLMs) for easy and dynamic
access, replication, and reuse. Building on two RE use cases, we developed
EmpiRE-Compass with a modular system design and workflows for curated and custom
competency questions. The dashboard is freely available online, accompanied by a
demonstration video. To manage operational costs, a limit of 25 requests per IP
address per day applies to the default LLM (GPT-4o mini). All source code and
documentation are released as an open-source project to foster reuse, adoption,
and extension. EmpiRE-Compass provides three core capabilities: (1) Exploratory
visual analytics for curated competency questions; (2) Neuro-symbolic synthesis
for custom competency questions; and (3) Reusable knowledge with all queries,
analyses, and results openly available. By unifying RKGs and LLMs in a neuro-
symbolic dashboard, EmpiRE-Compass advances sustainable LRs in RE, SE, and
beyond. It lowers technical barriers, fosters transparency and reproducibility,
and enables collaborative, continuously updated, and reusable LRs
