Title: How Hyper-Datafication Impacts the Sustainability Costs in Frontier AI
Authors: Sophia N. Wilson, Sebastian Mair, Mophat Okinyi, Erik B. Dam, Janin
Koch, Raghavendra Selvan
ID: 2602.00056
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.00056

Abstract:
Large-scale data has fuelled the success of frontier artificial intelligence
(AI) models over the past decade. This expansion has relied on sustained efforts
by large technology corporations to aggregate and curate internet-scale
datasets. In this work, we examine the environmental, social, and economic costs
of large-scale data in AI through a sustainability lens. We argue that the field
is shifting from building models from data to actively creating data for
building models. We characterise this transition as hyper-datafication, which
marks a critical juncture for the future of frontier AI and its societal
impacts. To quantify and contextualise data-related costs, we analyse
approximately 550,000 datasets from the Hugging Face Hub, focusing on dataset
growth, storage-related energy consumption and carbon footprint, and societal
representation using language data. We complement this analysis with qualitative
responses from data workers in Kenya to examine the labour involved, including
direct employment by big tech corporations and exposure to graphic content. We
further draw on external data sources to substantiate our findings by
illustrating the global disparity in data centre infrastructure. Our analyses
reveal that hyper-datafication does not merely increase resource consumption but
systematically redistributes environmental burdens, labour risks, and
representational harms toward the Global South, precarious data workers, and
under-represented cultures. Thus, we propose Data PROOFS recommendations
spanning provenance, resource awareness, ownership, openness, frugality, and
standards to mitigate these costs. Our work aims to make visible the often-
overlooked costs of data that underpin frontier AI and to stimulate broader
debate within the research community and beyond.
