Title: DreamDojo: A Generalist Robot World Model from Large-Scale Human Videos
Authors: Shenyuan Gao, William Liang, Kaiyuan Zheng, Ayaan Malik, Seonghyeon Ye,
Sihyun Yu, Wei-Cheng Tseng, Yuzhu Dong, Kaichun Mo, Chen-Hsuan Lin, Qianli Ma,
Seungjun Nah, Loic Magne, Jiannan Xiang, Yuqi Xie, Ruijie Zheng, Dantong Niu,
You Liang Tan, K. R. Zentner, George Kurian, Suneel Indupuru, Pooya Jannaty,
Jinwei Gu, Jun Zhang, Jitendra Malik, Pieter Abbeel, Ming-Yu Liu, Yuke Zhu, Joel
Jang, Linxi "Jim" Fan
ID: 2602.06949
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.06949

Abstract:
Being able to simulate the outcomes of actions in varied environments will
revolutionize the development of generalist agents at scale. However, modeling
these world dynamics, especially for dexterous robotics tasks, poses significant
challenges due to limited data coverage and scarce action labels. As an endeavor
towards this end, we introduce DreamDojo, a foundation world model that learns
diverse interactions and dexterous controls from 44k hours of egocentric human
videos. Our data mixture represents the largest video dataset to date for world
model pretraining, spanning a wide range of daily scenarios with diverse objects
and skills. To address the scarcity of action labels, we introduce continuous
latent actions as unified proxy actions, enhancing interaction knowledge
transfer from unlabeled videos. After post-training on small-scale target robot
data, DreamDojo demonstrates a strong understanding of physics and precise
action controllability. We also devise a distillation pipeline that accelerates
DreamDojo to a real-time speed of 10.81 FPS and further improves context
consistency. Our work enables several important applications based on generative
world models, including live teleoperation, policy evaluation, and model-based
planning. Systematic evaluation on multiple challenging out-of-distribution
(OOD) benchmarks verifies the significance of our method for simulating open-
world, contact-rich tasks, paving the way for general-purpose robot world
models.
