Title: Understanding Human-AI Collaboration in Cybersecurity Competitions
Authors: Tingxuan Tang, Nicolas Janis, Kalyn Asher Montague, Kevin Eykholt,
Dhilung Kirat, Youngja Park, Jiyong Jang, Adwait Nadkarni, Yue Xiao
ID: 2602.20446
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.20446

Abstract:
Capture-the-Flag (CTF) competitions are increasingly becoming a testbed for
evaluating AI capabilities at solving security tasks, due to the controlled
environments and objective success criteria. Existing evaluations have focused
on how successful AI is at solving CTF challenges in isolation from human CTF
players. As AI usage increases in both academic and industrial settings, it is
equally likely that human players may collaborate with AI agents to solve
challenges. This possibility exposes a key knowledge gap: how do humans perceive
AI CTF assistance; when assistance is provided, how do they collaborate and is
it effective with respect to human performance; how do humans assisted by AI
compare to the performance of fully autonomous AI agents on the same challenges.
We address this gap with the first empirical study of AI assistance in a live,
onsite CTF. In a study with 41 participants, we qualitatively study (i) how
participants' perception, trust, and expectations shift before versus after
hands-on AI use, and (ii) how participants collaborate with an instrumented AI
agent. Moreover, we also (iii) benchmark four autonomous AI agents on the same
fresh challenge set to compare outcomes with human teams and analyze agent
trajectories. We find that, as the competition progresses, teams increasingly
delegate larger subtasks to the AI, giving it more agency. Interestingly, CTF
challenges solving rates are often constrained not by model's reasoning
capabilities, but rather by the human players: ineffective prompting and poor
context specification become the primary bottleneck. Remarkably, autonomous
agents that self-direct their prompting and tool use bypass this bottleneck and
outperform most human teams, coming in second overall in the competition. We
conclude with implications for the future design of CTF challenges and for
building effective human-in-the-loop AI systems for security.
