Title: Language Movement Primitives: Grounding Language Models in Robot Motion
Authors: Yinlong Dai, Benjamin A. Christie, Daniel J. Evans, Dylan P. Losey,
Simon Stepputtis
ID: 2602.02839
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.02839

Abstract:
Enabling robots to perform novel manipulation tasks from natural language
instructions remains a fundamental challenge in robotics, despite significant
progress in generalized problem solving with foundational models. Large vision
and language models (VLMs) are capable of processing high-dimensional input data
for visual scene and language understanding, as well as decomposing tasks into a
sequence of logical steps; however, they struggle to ground those steps in
embodied robot motion. On the other hand, robotics foundation models output
action commands, but require in-domain fine-tuning or experience before they are
able to perform novel tasks successfully. At its core, there still remains the
fundamental challenge of connecting abstract task reasoning with low-level
motion control. To address this disconnect, we propose Language Movement
Primitives (LMPs), a framework that grounds VLM reasoning in Dynamic Movement
Primitive (DMP) parameterization. Our key insight is that DMPs provide a small
number of interpretable parameters, and VLMs can set these parameters to specify
diverse, continuous, and stable trajectories. Put another way: VLMs can reason
over free-form natural language task descriptions, and semantically ground their
desired motions into DMPs -- bridging the gap between high-level task reasoning
and low-level position and velocity control. Building on this combination of
VLMs and DMPs, we formulate our LMP pipeline for zero-shot robot manipulation
that effectively completes tabletop manipulation problems by generating a
sequence of DMP motions. Across 20 real-world manipulation tasks, we show that
LMP achieves 80% task success as compared to 31% for the best-performing
baseline. See videos at our website: https://collab.me.vt.edu/lmp
