Title: EvoGuard: An Extensible Agentic RL-based Framework for Practical and
Evolving AI-Generated Image Detection
Authors: Chenyang Zhu, Maorong Wang, Jun Liu, Ching-Chun Chang, Isao Echizen
ID: 2603.17343
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.17343

Abstract:
The rapid proliferation of AI-Generated Images (AIGIs) has introduced severe
risks of misinformation, making AIGI detection a critical yet challenging task.
While traditional detection paradigms mainly rely on low-level features, recent
research increasingly focuses on leveraging the general understanding ability of
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) to achieve better generalization, but
still suffer from limited extensibility and expensive training data annotations.
To better address complex and dynamic real-world environments, we propose
EvoGuard, a novel agentic framework for AIGI detection. It encapsulates various
state-of-the-art (SOTA) off-the-shelf MLLM and non-MLLM detectors as callable
tools, and coordinates them through a capability-aware dynamic orchestration
mechanism. Empowered by the agent's capacities for autonomous planning and
reflection, it intelligently selects suitable tools for given samples, reflects
intermediate results, and decides the next action, reaching a final conclusion
through multi-turn invocation and reasoning. This design effectively exploits
the complementary strengths among heterogeneous detectors, transcending the
limits of any single model. Furthermore, optimized by a GRPO-based Agentic
Reinforcement Learning algorithm using only low-cost binary labels, it
eliminates the reliance on fine-grained annotations. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that EvoGuard achieves SOTA accuracy while mitigating the bias
between positive and negative samples. More importantly, it allows the plug-and-
play integration of new detectors to boost overall performance in a train-free
manner, offering a highly practical, long-term solution to ever-evolving AIGI
threats. Source code will be publicly available upon acceptance.
