Title: RoCo Challenge at AAAI 2026: Benchmarking Robotic Collaborative
Manipulation for Assembly Towards Industrial Automation
Authors: Haichao Liu, Yuheng Zhou, Zhenyu Wu, Ziheng Ji, Ziyu Shan, Qianzhun
Wang, Ruixuan Liu, Zhiyuan Yang, Yejun Gu, Shalman Khan, Shijun Yan, Jun Liu,
Haiyue Zhu, Changliu Liu, Jianfei Yang, Jingbing Zhang, Ziwei Wang
ID: 2603.15469
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.15469

Abstract:
Embodied Artificial Intelligence (EAI) is rapidly developing, gradually
subverting previous autonomous systems' paradigms from isolated perception to
integrated, continuous action. This transition is highly significant for
industrial robotic manipulation, promising to free human workers from
repetitive, dangerous daily labor. To benchmark and advance this capability, we
introduce the Robotic Collaborative Assembly Assistance (RoCo) Challenge with a
dataset towards simulation and real-world assembly manipulation. Set against the
backdrop of human-centered manufacturing, this challenge focuses on a high-
precision planetary gearbox assembly task, a demanding yet highly representative
operation in modern industry. Built upon a self-developed data collection,
training, and evaluation system in Isaac Sim, and utilizing a dual-arm robot for
real-world deployment, the challenge operates in two phases. The Simulation
Round defines fine-grained task phases for step-wise scoring to handle the long-
horizon nature of the assembly. The Real-World Round mirrors this evaluation
with physical gearbox components and high-quality teleoperated datasets. The
core tasks require assembling an epicyclic gearbox from scratch, including
mounting three planet gears, a sun gear, and a ring gear. Attracting over 60
teams and 170+ participants from more than 10 countries, the challenge yielded
highly effective solutions, most notably ARC-VLA and RoboCola. Results
demonstrate that a dual-model framework for long-horizon multi-task learning is
highly effective, and the strategic utilization of recovery-from-failure
curriculum data is a critical insight for successful deployment. This report
outlines the competition setup, evaluation approach, key findings, and future
directions for industrial EAI. Our dataset, CAD files, code, and evaluation
results can be found at: https://rocochallenge.github.io/RoCo2026/.
