Title: Stellar age determination using deep neural networks: Isochrone ages for
1.3 million stars, based on BaSTI, MIST, PARSEC, Dartmouth and SYCLIST
evolutionary grids
Authors: T. Boin, L. Casamiquela, M. Haywood, P. Di Matteo, Y. Lebreton, M.
Uddin, D. R. Reese
ID: 2603.09540
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.09540

Abstract:
We aim to develop a model-driven deep learning approach to age determination, by
training neural networks on stellar evolutionary grids. Contrary to the usual
data-driven deep learning approach of using prior age estimates as training
data, our method has the potential for a wider and less biased range of
application. The low computational cost of deep learning methods compared to
bayesian isochrone-fitting allows for a broad analysis of large spectroscopic
catalogues.
  We train multilayer perceptrons on different stellar evolutionary grids to map
[M/H], MG, (GBP - GRP) to stellar age $τ$. We combine Gaia photometry and
parallaxes, metallicities and $α$ elements from spectroscopic surveys and
extinction maps, which are passed through the neural networks to estimate
stellar ages.
  We apply our method to the LAMOST DR10, GALAH DR3 & DR4 and APOGEE DR17
spectroscopic surveys, for which we estimate the ages using the BaSTI tracks,
along with other stellar evolutionary models. We leverage this novel technique
to study, for the first time, differences in age estimates from several
evolutionary grids applied on very large datasets. In addition, we date 13 open
clusters and one globular cluster and find a median absolute deviation with
literature ages of 0.20 Gyr. Along with the stellar ages catalogues from our
estimates, we release NEST (Neural Estimator of Stellar Times), a python package
to estimate stellar age based on this work, as well as a web interface.
  We show that, when using the same evolutionary grid, our method retrieves the
same ages as a bayesian approach like SPInS, for only a fraction of the
computational cost, with a 60,000 speedup factor for a typical star. This model-
driven deep learning technique thus opens up the way for broad galactic
archeology studies on the largest datasets available today and in the near
future with upcoming surveys such as 4MOST.
