Title: Deep learning-based astronomical multimodal data fusion: A comprehensive
review
Authors: Wujun Shao, Dongwei Fan, Chenzhou Cui, Yunfei Xu, Shirui Wei, Xin Lyu
ID: 2603.00699
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.00699

Abstract:
With the rapid advancements in observational technologies and the widespread
implementation of large-scale sky surveys, diverse electromagnetic wave data
(e.g., optical and infrared) and non-electromagnetic wave data (e.g.,
gravitational waves) have become increasingly accessible. Astronomy has thus
entered an unprecedented era of data abundance and complexity. Astronomers have
long relied on unimodal data analysis to perceive the universe, but these
efforts often provide only limited insights when confronted with the current
massive and heterogeneous astronomical data. In this context, multimodal data
fusion (MDF), as an emerging method, provides new opportunities to enhance the
value of astronomical data and deepening the understanding of the universe by
integrating information from different modalities. Recent progress in artificial
intelligence (AI), particularly in deep learning (DL), has greatly accelerated
the development of multimodal research in astronomy. Therefore, a timely review
of this field is essential. This paper begins by discussing the motivation and
necessity of astronomical MDF, followed by an overview of astronomical data
sources and major data modalities. It then introduces representative DL models
commonly used in astronomical multimodal studies, the general fusion process as
well as various fusion strategies, emphasizing their characteristics,
applicability, advantages, and limitations. Subsequently, the paper surveys
existing astronomical multimodal studies and datasets. Finally, the discussion
section synthesizes key findings, identifies potential challenges, and suggests
promising directions for future research. By offering a structured overview and
critical analysis, this review aims to inspire and guide researchers engaged in
DL-based MDF in astronomy.
