Title: The Multiverse of Time Series Machine Learning: an Archive for
Multivariate Time Series Classification
Authors: Matthew Middlehurst, Aiden Rushbrooke, Ali Ismail-Fawaz, Maxime
Devanne, Germain Forestier, Angus Dempster, Geoffrey I. Webb, Christopher
Holder, Anthony Bagnall
ID: 2603.20352
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.20352

Abstract:
Time series machine learning (TSML) is a growing research field that spans a
wide range
  of tasks. The popularity of established tasks such as classification,
clustering, and
  extrinsic regression has, in part, been driven by the availability of
benchmark datasets.
  An archive of 30 multivariate time series classification datasets, introduced
in 2018 and
  commonly known as the UEA archive, has since become an essential resource
cited in hundreds
  of publications. We present a substantial expansion of this archive that more
than quadruples
  its size, from 30 to 133 classification problems. We also release preprocessed
versions of
  datasets containing missing values or unequal length series, bringing the
total number of
  datasets to 147. Reflecting the growth of the archive and the broader
community, we rebrand
  it as the Multiverse archive to capture its diversity of domains. The
Multiverse archive
  includes datasets from multiple sources, consolidating other collections and
standalone
  datasets into a single, unified repository. Recognising that running
experiments across the
  full archive is computationally demanding, we recommend a subset of the full
archive called
  Multiverse-core (MV-core) for initial exploration. To support researchers in
using the new
  archive, we provide detailed guidance and a baseline evaluation of established
and recent
  classification algorithms, establishing performance benchmarks for future
research. We have
  created a dedicated repository for the Multiverse archive that provides a
common aeon
  and scikit-learn compatible framework for reproducibility, an extensive record
of
  published results, and an interactive interface to explore the results.
