Title: At the Corner of Quantum and Gravity
Authors: Ludovic Varrin
ID: 2603.21941
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.21941

Abstract:
In the presence of spacetime boundaries, diffeomorphisms in gravitational
theories can become physical and acquire non-vanishing Noether charges. These
charges obey an algebra which, within the extended phase-space formalism,
faithfully realizes diffeomorphism algebra. The corner proposal takes this
algebra of physical corner symmetries as a fundamental ingredient of quantum
gravity, in close analogy with the role of the Poincaré group in quantum field
theory. In this thesis we develop the quantum corner framework in the two-
dimensional setting. We give the full representation theory of the two-
dimensional extended corner symmetry group, which may be interpreted either as
the symmetry group of two-dimensional gravity or as the corner symmetry group
relevant for four-dimensional spherically symmetric gravity. Within the corner
proposal, the resulting representation spaces are then interpreted as candidate
Hilbert spaces for quantum gravity. This representation-theoretic structure
naturally enables a description of local subsystems. In particular, we present a
gluing procedure that constructs quantum states associated with an entangling
corner between two spacetime subregions, and use it to compute the entanglement
entropy between the two regions. To connect the quantum observables to the
classical corner charges, we construct the coadjoint orbits of the quantum
corner symmetry group and relate them to the classical structure through twisted
moment maps and to the quantum structure through generalized Perelomov coherent
states. This provides a notion of semiclassical limit within the corner
framework. Finally, in the context of static, spherically symmetric spacetimes,
we show that a distinguished family of coherent states reproduces the horizon
area law for entropy in the semiclassical limit, yielding a quantum, symmetry-
based explanation of the Bekenstein--Hawking formula.
