Title: Human-AI Collaborative Autonomous Experimentation With Proxy Modeling for
Comparative Observation
Authors: Arpan Biswas, Hiroshi Funakubo, Yongtao Liu
ID: 2603.12618
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.12618

Abstract:
Optimization for different tasks like material characterization, synthesis, and
functional properties for desired applications over multi-dimensional control
parameters need a rapid strategic search through active learning such as
Bayesian optimization (BO). However, such high-dimensional experimental physical
descriptors are complex and noisy, from which realization of a low-dimensional
mathematical scalar metrics or objective functions can be erroneous. Moreover,
in traditional purely data-driven autonomous exploration, such objective
functions often ignore the subtle variation and key features of the physical
descriptors, thereby can fail to discover unknown phenomenon of the material
systems. To address this, here we present a proxy-modelled Bayesian optimization
(px-BO) via on-the-fly teaming between human and AI agents. Over the loop of BO,
instead of defining a mathematical objective function directly from the
experimental data, we introduce a voting system on the fly where the new
experimental outcome will be compared with existing experiments, and the human
agents will choose the preferred samples. These human-guided comparisons are
then transformed into a proxy-based objective function via fitting Bradley-Terry
(BT) model. Then, to minimize human interaction, this iteratively trained proxy
model also acts as an AI agent for future surrogate human votes. Finally, these
surrogate votes are periodically validated by human agents, and the corrections
are then learned by the proxy model on-the-fly. We demonstrated the performance
of the proposed px-BO framework into simulated and BEPS data generated from PTO
sample. We find that our approach provided better control of the domain experts
for an improved search over traditional data-driven exploration, thus, signifies
the importance of human-AI teaming in an accelerated and meaningful material
space exploration.
