Title: To What Extent Are Star Cluster Ages Encoded in Their Environments?
Exploring the Spatial Distribution of Age-Related Information with PHANGS-HST
Imaging and Convolutional Neural Networks
Authors: Javier Viaña, Janice C. Lee, Andrew Vanderburg, John F. Wu, M. Jimena
Rodríguez, Remy Indebetouw, Médéric Boquien, Ralf S. Klessen, Sophia Rivera,
Erik Rosolowsky, Oleg Y. Gnedin, Daniel A. Dale, Kirsten L. Larson, David A.
Thilker, Gagandeep Anand
ID: 2603.07289
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.07289

Abstract:
The environments around star clusters evolve as stellar feedback reshapes the
interstellar medium and dynamical processes reorganize the structure of the
surrounding stellar field. As approximately single-age populations, star
clusters can serve as clocks to trace these environmental changes. In this
exploratory study, we test whether convolutional neural networks (CNNs) can
identify age-dependent changes in cluster environments. We take cluster ages as
given from basic SED fitting of five-band UV-optical aperture photometry from
the PHANGS (Physics at High Angular resolution in Nearby GalaxieS) HST survey.
We first show that CNNs can be trained on image cutouts centered on clusters to
recover ages directly from imaging. This demonstration provides the foundation
for this study, which examines whether the information used by CNNs to predict
age is coherent and physically meaningful. We perform controlled image occlusion
experiments as an explainable AI method. These show that the CNNs extract age-
predictive environmental cues in the absence of cluster light and when
information on SED shape is removed by combining the five filters into one
image. We find that reliance on environmental information increases at the
youngest (<10 Myr) and oldest (>1 Gyr) ages, where clusters can exhibit
similarly red colors. Our results are consistent with the long-recognized
picture that cluster environments evolve systematically with age. We demonstrate
that this information is encoded at a level detectable by machine-learning and
recoverable from broadband imaging. This establishes a path for using new
techniques to connect image-based age inference to the physical evolution of
cluster environments.
