Title: From Local Corrections to Generalized Skills: Improving Neuro-Symbolic
Policies with MEMO
Authors: Benjamin A. Christie, Yinlong Dai, Mohammad Bararjanianbahnamiri, Simon
Stepputtis, Dylan P. Losey
ID: 2603.04560
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.04560

Abstract:
Recent works use a neuro-symbolic framework for general manipulation policies.
The advantage of this framework is that -- by applying off-the-shelf vision and
language models -- the robot can break complex tasks down into semantic
subtasks. However, the fundamental bottleneck is that the robot needs skills to
ground these subtasks into embodied motions. Skills can take many forms (e.g.,
trajectory snippets, motion primitives, coded functions), but regardless of
their form skills act as a constraint. The high-level policy can only ground its
language reasoning through the available skills; if the robot cannot generate
the right skill for the current task, its policy will fail. We propose to
address this limitation -- and dynamically expand the robot's skills -- by
leveraging user feedback. When a robot fails, humans can intuitively explain
what went wrong (e.g., ``no, go higher''). While a simple approach is to recall
this exact text the next time the robot faces a similar situation, we
hypothesize that by collecting, clustering, and re-phrasing natural language
corrections across multiple users and tasks, we can synthesize more general text
guidance and coded skill templates. Applying this hypothesis we develop Memory
Enhanced Manipulation (MEMO). MEMO builds and maintains a retrieval-augmented
skillbook gathered from human feedback and task successes. At run time, MEMO
retrieves relevant text and code from this skillbook, enabling the robot's
policy to generate new skills while reasoning over multi-task human feedback.
Our experiments demonstrate that using MEMO to aggregate local feedback into
general skill templates enables generalization to novel tasks where existing
baselines fall short. See supplemental material here:
https://collab.me.vt.edu/memo
