Title: Assessing the robustness of amortized simulation-based inference to
transient noise in gravitational-wave ringdowns
Authors: Song-Tao Liu, Tian-Yang Sun, Yu-Xin Wang, Yong-Xin Zhang, Shang-Jie
Jin, Jing-Fei Zhang, Xin Zhang
ID: 2603.12032
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.12032

Abstract:
Gravitational waves (GW) emitted by binary systems allow us to perform precision
tests of general relativity in the strong field regime. Ringdown signals allow
for probing black hole mass and spin with high precision in GW astronomy. With
improvements in current and next-generation GW detectors, developing likelihood-
free parameter inference methods is crucial. This is especially important when
facing challenges such as non-standard noise, partial data, or incomplete signal
models that prevent the use of analytical likelihood functions. In this work, we
propose an amortized simulation-based inference strategy to estimate ringdown
parameters directly. Specifically, our method is based on amortized neural
posterior estimation, which trains a neural density estimator of the posterior
for all data segments within the prior range. The results show that our trained
amortized network achieves statistically consistent parameter estimates with
valid confidence coverage compared to established Markov-chain methods, while
offering inference speeds that are orders of magnitude faster. Furthermore, we
evaluate the robustness of the method against transient noise contamination. Our
analysis reveals that the timing of glitch injection has a decisive impact on
estimation bias, particularly during the tail of a signal with sparse
information. Glitch strength is positively correlated with estimation error, but
has limited effect at low signal-to-noise ratios. Mass and spin parameters are
most sensitive to noise. This study not only provides an efficient and accurate
inference framework for ringdown analysis but also lays a foundation for
developing robust data-processing pipelines for future GW astronomy in realistic
noise environments.
