Title: ODySSeI: An Open-Source End-to-End Framework for Automated Detection,
Segmentation, and Severity Estimation of Lesions in Invasive Coronary
Angiography Images
Authors: Anand Choudhary, Xiaowu Sun, Thabo Mahendiran, Ortal Senouf, Denise
Auberson, Bernard De Bruyne, Stephane Fournier, Olivier Muller, Emmanuel Abbé,
Pascal Frossard, Dorina Thanou
ID: 2603.20021
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.20021

Abstract:
Invasive Coronary Angiography (ICA) is the clinical gold standard for the
assessment of coronary artery disease. However, its interpretation remains
subjective and prone to intra- and inter-operator variability. In this work, we
introduce ODySSeI: an Open-source end-to-end framework for automated Detection,
Segmentation, and Severity estimation of lesions in ICA images. ODySSeI
integrates deep learning-based lesion detection and lesion segmentation models
trained using a novel Pyramidal Augmentation Scheme (PAS) to enhance robustness
and real-time performance across diverse patient cohorts (2149 patients from
Europe, North America, and Asia). Furthermore, we propose a quantitative
coronary angiography-free Lesion Severity Estimation (LSE) technique that
directly computes the Minimum Lumen Diameter (MLD) and diameter stenosis from
the predicted lesion geometry. Extensive evaluation on both in-distribution and
out-of-distribution clinical datasets demonstrates ODySSeI's strong
generalizability. Our PAS yields large performance gains in highly complex tasks
as compared to relatively simpler ones, notably, a 2.5-fold increase in lesion
detection performance versus a 1-3\% increase in lesion segmentation performance
over their respective baselines. Our LSE technique achieves high accuracy, with
predicted MLD values differing by only $\pm$ 2-3 pixels from the corresponding
ground truths. On average, ODySSeI processes a raw ICA image within only a few
seconds on a CPU and in a fraction of a second on a GPU and is available as a
plug-and-play web interface at swisscardia.epfl.ch. Overall, this work
establishes ODySSeI as a comprehensive and open-source framework which supports
automated, reproducible, and scalable ICA analysis for real-time clinical
decision-making.
