Title: Universality classes, Thermodynamics of Group Entropies, and Black Holes
Authors: Henrik Jeldtoft Jensen, Petr Jizba, Piergiulio Tempesta
ID: 2603.02385
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.02385

Abstract:
Conventional Boltzmann--Gibbs statistical mechanics successfully describes
systems with weak to moderate correlations, where the number of accessible
configurations $W(N)$ grows exponentially with the number of degrees of
freedom~$N$. However, this framework breaks down for systems with strong
correlations or long-range interactions, for which the configuration space
exhibits non-exponential growth. While numerous generalized entropies have been
proposed to address this limitation, a coherent link to classical thermodynamic
laws has remained elusive. Here, we propose group entropies as a unifying
framework, defining universality classes of entropies through the asymptotic
scaling of $W(N)$, each yielding an extensive entropy. We show that this
approach provides the basis for a consistent thermodynamic formulation beyond
the Boltzmann--Gibbs paradigm. In particular, by expressing these entropies in
terms of thermodynamic state variables and taking the thermodynamic limit, we
demonstrate their consistency with classical thermodynamics, in close analogy to
the emergence of the Clausius entropy from the Boltzmann--Gibbs formalism.
Focusing on the zeroth thermodynamic law, we identify the empirical temperature
and, by using Carathéodory's formulation of the second law, we derive the
associated absolute temperature. As an application of the thermodynamic
framework obtained, we analyze black-hole thermodynamics using the group entropy
class corresponding to stretched-exponential behavior of $W(N)$. In particular,
we show that a hallmark property of black holes -- their negative specific heat
-- emerges naturally within this framework while the entropy remains extensive.
This result holds for the stretched-exponential entropies associated with both
the Bekenstein--Hawking and Barrow entropy scalings.
