Title: Fully anharmonic calculations of the free energy of migration of point
defects in UO2 and PuO2
Authors: Dillon G. Frost, Johann Bouchet, Mihai-Cosmin Marinica, Clovis
Lapointe, Jean-Bernard Maillet, Luca Messina
ID: 2603.16602
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.16602

Abstract:
Calculating diffusion rates of point defects in materials typically relies on
the harmonic approximation to estimate migration free energies. However,
anharmonic effects can have a large impact on diffusion properties, and
explicitly accounting for them is usually computationally demanding and
difficult to achieve in practice. In this work, we investigate the role of
anharmonic effects on defect migration in UO2 and PuO2 using the potential of
average force integration (PAFI) method. Fully anharmonic migration free
energies are computed for several cation and anion defect types, using the
Cooper-Rushton-Grimes (CRG) potential and a recently developed machine learning
spectral neighbour analysis potential (SNAP) for UO2. Results are systematically
compared to harmonic estimates based on attempt frequencies and the Debye
approximation. Our results reveal that the validity of the harmonic
approximation strongly depends on the defect type and the underlying potential,
with significant deviations observed in several cases. In particular, defect
migration barriers are found to decrease strongly with increasing temperature
(up to 1 eV between 0 and 1200 K), and anharmonic contributions can
substantially modify migration entropies and, consequently, diffusion
coefficients. Comparing defect migration in UO2 and PuO2 using the CRG potential
reveals that PuO2 has lower migration enthalpies at 0~K for all considered
defects, but this is compensated by higher attempt frequencies, resulting in
similar overall jump frequencies in UO2 and PuO2. These findings provide insight
into the limitations of commonly used approximations and highlight the
importance of anharmonic effects for predictive modeling of diffusion in nuclear
fuels as well as in other classes of materials.
