Title: Understanding the earth systems of Malawi: Ecological sustainability, culture, and place‐based education
Authors: George E. Glasson, Jeffrey Frykholm, Ndalapa A. Mhango, Absalom Dumsell Keins Phiri
ID: openalex.W2042310344
URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/sce.20148

Abstract The purpose of this 2‐year study was to investigate Malawian teacher
educators' perspectives and dispositions toward teaching about ecological
sustainability issues in Malawi, a developing country in sub‐Sahara Africa. This
study was embedded in a larger theoretical framework of investigating earth
systems science through the understanding of nature–knowledge–culture systems
from local, place‐based perspectives. Specifically, we were interested in
learning more about eco‐justice issues that are related to environmental
degradation in Malawi and the potential role of inquiry‐oriented pedagogies in
addressing these issues. In a science methods course, the African educators'
views on deforestation and teaching about ecological sustainability were
explored within the context of the local environment and culture. Teachers
participated in inquiry pedagogies designed to promote the sharing of
perspectives related to the connections between culture and ecological
degradation. Strategies encouraging dialogue and reflection included
role‐playing, class discussions, curriculum development activities, teaching
experiences with children, and field trips to a nature preserve. Data were
analyzed from postcolonial and critical pedagogy of place theoretical
perspectives to better understand the hybridization of viewpoints influenced by
both Western and indigenous science and the political hegemonies that impact
sustainable living in Malawi. Findings suggested that the colonial legacy of
Malawi continues to impact the ecological sustainability issue of deforestation.
Inquiry‐oriented pedagogies and connections to indigenous science were embraced
by the Malawian educators as a means to involve children in investigation,
decision making, and ownership of critical environmental issues. © 2006 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc. Sci Ed 90 :660–680, 2006
