Title: Beholding the Beauty of Self: The Psychological Integration of the Afrocentric-Self among African-American Females Socialized in a Eurocentric Aesthetic
Authors: Donna Cook
ID: openalex.W3178159943
URL: https://doi.org/10.22371/07.2006.004

Self-esteem and body image disturbances prominently figure into many physical
and psychological health disorders such as depression, eating disorders, anxiety
disorders, and chemical dependency. In Euro-American culture, media images of
femininity and physical attractiveness reinforce generally held perceptions of
the idealized female beauty as tall, white, slender, and often blond and blue
eyed. The physical morphology of African-American women does not genetically
"fit" this westernized standard of beauty with implications for their mental
health. The socialization of African-American women in a culture that embraces a
different ethnic standard of beauty influences their perceptions of how
physically attractive they see themselves. This may affect their self-esteem and
produce body image disturbances that put them at risk for mental health
problems. Many of these women seek emotional healing and a sense of empowerment
from the mental health care system. Mental health professionals must consider
that gender and racial influences, embedded in a Eurocentric aesthetic, play a
significant role in providing culturally competent mental health care.
Dimensional analysis was used in this grounded theory study to produce
theoretical understandings of these societal and psychological issues. The
Psychological Integration of the Afrocentric-Self is the central dimension that
creates an understanding of how many African-American women resist a Eurocentric
aesthetic and develop their own perceptions of physical attractiveness. Linked
dimensions included the legacies of slavery and resistance that influenced the
roles of the family, society and the media on the self-esteem and body images of
African-American women. Conducting this research from a Black feminist
perspective provided an avenue for these participants to share their experiences
of racism, sexism, and classism in this society and to surface how they resist
this oppression. The self-defined standpoint shared by each participant was
deemed valid knowledge because it was "her truth" and a true expression of her
experiences in the context of her life. A complex, multi-dimensional way of
knowing was generated through the voices of these participants. The application
of this new understanding to clinical practice in mental health settings is
beneficial to the researcher, African-American women, the mental health
community, and society.
