Title: john dewey on children, childhood, and education
Authors: David Kennedy
ID: openalex.W1908838202
URL: https://dialnet.unirioja.es/descarga/articulo/5013827.pdf

It is difficult to find just one place to look for children and childhood in the
American philosopher John Dewey’s work. This is not because he uses the terms so
often, but because the concept of childhood pervades his opus in and through
another set of terms—development, growth, experience, plasticity, habit,
impulse, and education. In Dewey’s language, none of these terms mean quite what
they mean in other thinkers’ language, and especially not in the language of the
human development theorists of the early twentieth century and after, who based
their thinking on a monological, unidirectional developmental trajectory that
could be applied at all levels of the evolutionary continuum. Dewey is an
interactionist through and through, and thus all his terms should be understood
as dialectical. He does not invoke the concept “child” without invoking the
concept “adult,” nor does he describe anything that does not have a normative
dimension, which by definition belies “pure” description. His is a language of
possibility, and the limits of human possibility are incalculable. This is why
the concept of childhood is so important in his work. In this text we present
selections from two works, the first emerging at the sickening epicenter of the
Great War, in 1916—a war in which youth was sacrificed to what he calls adult
“infantilisms” on a historically unprecedented scale, and a war that, arguably,
effectively suppressed the educational possibilities his work represents for the
rest of the century. Democracy and Education (New York: Macmillan) is his magnum
opus on education, and characteristically both garrulous and brilliantly
pointed, maddeningly oblique and trenchantly critical, painfully dull and
fitfully enthralling, explicitly conservative and implicitly radical. The next
selections are from Human Nature and Conduct (Carbondale IL: Southern Illinois
University Press), published in 1922, when the orgiastic death-feast of the
tyrants, the politicians, and their hosts of blind acolytes was (temporarily)
over.
