Title: Reading Between the Lines: Representations and Constructions of Youth and Crime in Aotearoa/New Zealand
Authors: Fiona Beals
ID: openalex.W1557206211
URL: https://doi.org/10.26686/wgtn.16920796

&lt;p&gt;In this thesis, I examine constructions of youth deviance in
Aotearoa/New Zealand, 2002. In 2002, New Zealand had a national election in
which adult commentators and observers concentrated and speculated on the
reasons for a supposed increase in youth deviance and a spate of extraordinarily
violent youth crimes. Youth-at-risk, early intervention, the family, and
education were words that emerged continuously in commentator discussions. There
was no critique of these words, or the practices they implied, and very little
discussion of the implications the use of these words and practices posed for
young people. In this thesis, I address this gap in the discussion by critically
exploring the ways in which authors in institutional contexts constructed
deviant youth and the implications of these constructions for youth. In this
research, I sampled published texts in 2002 from academia, government, and
media; three institutions which produce and reproduce knowledge in New Zealand.
I applied a form of discourse analysis to the texts to explore and contextualise
evident constructions. This analysis involved a bricolage of poststructural
methodologies in the attempt to make an accessible argument, which effectively
addressed the purposes of the research. I found that authors did not apply a
knowledge devoid of power. Whether used to construct a picture of the deviant
youth, or to describe necessary interventions into deviance, they used knowledge
to construct the deviant youth as powerless effects of development and risk.
Authors used knowledge to divide young people into the abnormally-deviant youth-
at-risk and the normally-deviant adolescent. Applying knowledge allowed those
writing about youth crime to construct and position young people as powerless.
Authors reinforced this when they used knowledge to inform practices and
interventions, which allowed adults to control the young person’s access to, and
use of, power. In particular, authors and other experts saw mass education as a
powerful practice of control and socialisation. Through education, adult society
could remove the abnormallydeviant youth from the dysfunctional family
environment and re-socialise the young person into conformity. Those writing
applied a similar reasoning in other described interventions such as
surveillance, conferencing, and early intervention. Interventions allowed adults
to control the deviance of youth. I finish this thesis by arguing that
interventions and contradictions in constructions show that power is not one-
sided. That is, power is not always in the hands of adults. Rather, sociological
theory can be applied to demonstrate and explore a power struggle between adults
and young people where resistance coexists with power. I argue that resistance
can provide an alternative explanation to the dominant ideas held by those
working with, and talking about, deviant youth. Resistance allows for a concept
of agency in which both deviance and non-deviance can be seen as a reactive
response by the young person.&lt;/p&gt;
