Title: Extreme mutation testing in practice: An industrial case study
Authors: Maik Betka, Stefan Wagner
ID: 2103.08480
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.08480

Abstract:
Mutation testing is used to evaluate the effectiveness of test suites. In recent
years, a promising variation called extreme mutation testing emerged that is
computationally less expensive. It identifies methods where their functionality
can be entirely removed, and the test suite would not notice it, despite having
coverage. These methods are called pseudo-tested. In this paper, we compare the
execution and analysis times for traditional and extreme mutation testing and
discuss what they mean in practice. We look at how extreme mutation testing
impacts current software development practices and discuss open challenges that
need to be addressed to foster industry adoption. For that, we conducted an
industrial case study consisting of running traditional and extreme mutation
testing in a large software project from the semiconductor industry that is
covered by a test suite of more than 11,000 unit tests. In addition to that, we
did a qualitative analysis of 25 pseudo-tested methods and interviewed two
experienced developers to see how they write unit tests and gathered opinions on
how useful the findings of extreme mutation testing are. Our results include
execution times, scores, numbers of executed tests and mutators, reasons why
methods are pseudo-tested, and an interview summary. We conclude that the
shorter execution and analysis times are well noticeable in practice and show
that extreme mutation testing supplements writing unit tests in conjunction with
code coverage tools. We propose that pseudo-tested code should be highlighted in
code coverage reports and that extreme mutation testing should be performed when
writing unit tests rather than in a decoupled session. Future research should
investigate how to perform extreme mutation testing while writing unit tests
such that the results are available fast enough but still meaningful.
