Title: JUGE: An Infrastructure for Benchmarking Java Unit Test Generators
Authors: Xavier Devroey, Alessio Gambi, Juan Pablo Galeotti, René Just, Fitsum Kifetew et al.
ID: 2106.07520
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.07520

Abstract:
Researchers and practitioners have designed and implemented various automated
test case generators to support effective software testing. Such generators
exist for various languages (e.g., Java, C#, or Python) and for various
platforms (e.g., desktop, web, or mobile applications). Such generators exhibit
varying effectiveness and efficiency, depending on the testing goals they aim to
satisfy (e.g., unit-testing of libraries vs. system-testing of entire
applications) and the underlying techniques they implement. In this context,
practitioners need to be able to compare different generators to identify the
most suited one for their requirements, while researchers seek to identify
future research directions. This can be achieved through the systematic
execution of large-scale evaluations of different generators. However, the
execution of such empirical evaluations is not trivial and requires a
substantial effort to collect benchmarks, setup the evaluation infrastructure,
and collect and analyse the results. In this paper, we present our JUnit
Generation benchmarking infrastructure (JUGE) supporting generators (e.g.,
search-based, random-based, symbolic execution, etc.) seeking to automate the
production of unit tests for various purposes (e.g., validation, regression
testing, fault localization, etc.). The primary goal is to reduce the overall
effort, ease the comparison of several generators, and enhance the knowledge
transfer between academia and industry by standardizing the evaluation and
comparison process. Since 2013, eight editions of a unit testing tool
competition, co-located with the Search-Based Software Testing Workshop, have
taken place and used and updated JUGE. As a result, an increasing amount of
tools (over ten) from both academia and industry have been evaluated on JUGE,
matured over the years, and allowed the identification of future research
directions.
