Title: Test Script Intention Generation for Mobile Application via GUI Image and Code Understanding
Authors: Shengcheng Yu, Chunrong Fang, Jia Liu, Zhenyu Chen
ID: 2107.05165
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.05165

Abstract:
Testing is the most direct and effective technique to ensure software quality.
Test scripts always play a more important role in mobile app testing than test
cases for source code, due to the GUI-intensive and event-driven characteristics
of mobile applications (app). Test scripts focus on user interactions and the
corresponding response events, which is significant for testing the target app
functionalities. Therefore, it is critical to understand the test scripts for
better script maintenance and modification. There exist some mature code
understanding (i.e., code comment generation) technologies that can be directly
applied to functionality source code with business logic. However, such
technologies will have difficulties when being applied to test scripts, because
test scripts are loosely linked to apps under test (AUT) by widget selectors,
and do not contain business logic themselves. In order to solve the test script
understanding gap, this paper presents a novel approach, namely TestIntention,
to infer the intention of GUI test scripts. Test intention refers to the user
expectations of app behaviors for specific operations. TestIntention formalizes
test scripts with an operation sequence model. For each operation within the
sequence, TestIntention extracts the target widget selector and links the
selector to the GUI layout information or the corresponding response events. For
widgets identified by XPath, TestIntention utilizes the image understanding
technologies to explore the detailed information of the widget images, the
intention of which is understood with a deep learning model. For widgets
identified by ID, TestIntention first maps the selectors to the response methods
with business logic, and then adopts code understanding technologies to describe
code in natural language form. Results of all operations are combined to
generate test intention for test scripts.
