Title: Single and Multi-objective Test Cases Prioritization for Self-driving Cars in Virtual Environments
Authors: Christian Birchler, Sajad Khatiri, Pouria Derakhshanfar, Sebastiano Panichella, Annibale Panichella
ID: 2107.09614
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.09614

Abstract:
Testing with simulation environments helps to identify critical failing
scenarios for self-driving cars (SDCs). Simulation-based tests are safer than
in-field operational tests and allow detecting software defects before
deployment. However, these tests are very expensive and are too many to be run
frequently within limited time constraints. In this paper, we investigate test
case prioritization techniques to increase the ability to detect SDC regression
faults with virtual tests earlier. Our approach, called SDC-Prioritizer,
prioritizes virtual tests for SDCs according to static features of the roads we
designed to be used within the driving scenarios. These features can be
collected without running the tests, which means that they do not require past
execution results. We introduce two evolutionary approaches to prioritize the
test cases using diversity metrics (black-box heuristics) computed on these
static features. These two approaches, called SO-SDC-Prioritizer and
MO-SDC-Prioritizer, use single-objective and multi-objective genetic algorithms,
respectively, to find trade-offs between executing the less expensive tests and
the most diverse test cases earlier. Our empirical study conducted in the SDC
domain shows that MO-SDC-Prioritizer significantly improves the ability to
detect safety-critical failures at the same level of execution time compared to
baselines: random and greedy-based test case orderings. Besides, our study
indicates that multi-objective meta-heuristics outperform single-objective
approaches when prioritizing simulation-based tests for SDCs. MO-SDC-Prioritizer
prioritizes test cases with a large improvement in fault detection while its
overhead (up to 0.45% of the test execution cost) is negligible.
