Title: Mobile App Crowdsourced Test Report Consistency Detection via Deep Image-and-Text Fusion Understanding
Authors: Shengcheng Yu, Chunrong Fang, Quanjun Zhang, Zhihao Cao, Yexiao Yun et al.
ID: 2108.07401
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07401

Abstract:
Crowdsourced testing, as a distinct testing paradigm, has attracted much
attention in software testing, especially in mobile application (app) testing
field. Compared with in-house testing, crowdsourced testing shows superiority
with the diverse testing environments when faced with the mobile testing
fragmentation problem. However, crowdsourced testing also encounters the
low-quality test report problem caused by unprofessional crowdworkers involved
with different expertise. In order to handle the submitted reports of uneven
quality, app developers have to distinguish high-quality reports from
low-quality ones to help the bug inspection. One kind of typical low-quality
test report is inconsistent test reports, which means the textual descriptions
are not focusing on the attached bug-occurring screenshots. According to our
empirical survey, only 18.07% crowdsourced test reports are consistent.
Inconsistent reports cause waste on mobile app testing. To solve the
inconsistency problem, we propose ReCoDe to detect the consistency of
crowdsourced test reports via deep image-and-text fusion understanding. ReCoDe
is a two-stage approach that first classifies the reports based on textual
descriptions into different categories according to the bug feature. In the
second stage, ReCoDe has a deep understanding of the GUI image features of the
app screenshots and then applies different strategies to handle different types
of bugs to detect the consistency of the crowdsourced test reports. We conduct
an experiment on a dataset with over 22k test reports to evaluate ReCoDe, and
the results show the effectiveness of ReCoDe in detecting the consistency of
crowdsourced test reports. Besides, a user study is conducted to prove the
practical value of ReCoDe in effectively helping app developers improve the
efficiency of reviewing the crowdsourced test reports.
