Title: Automated, Targeted Testing of Property-Based Testing Predicates
Authors: Tim Nelson, Elijah Rivera, Sam Soucie, Thomas Del Vecchio, John Wrenn et al.
ID: 2111.10414
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.10414

Abstract:
Context: This work is based on property-based testing (PBT). PBT is an
increasingly important form of software testing. Furthermore, it serves as a
concrete gateway into the abstract area of formal methods. Specifically, we
focus on students learning PBT methods. Inquiry: How well do students do at PBT?
Our goal is to assess the quality of the predicates they write as part of PBT.
Prior work introduced the idea of decomposing the predicate's property into a
conjunction of independent subproperties. Testing the predicate against each
subproperty gives a "semantic" understanding of their performance. Approach: The
notion of independence of subproperties both seems intuitive and was an
important condition in prior work. First, we show that this condition is overly
restrictive and might hide valuable information: it both undercounts errors and
makes it hard to capture misconceptions. Second, we introduce two forms of
automation, one based on PBT tools and the other on SAT-solving, to enable
testing of student predicates. Third, we compare the output of these automated
tools against manually-constructed tests. Fourth, we also measure the
performance of those tools. Finally, we re-assess student performance reported
in prior work. Knowledge: We show the difficulty caused by the independent
subproperty requirement. We provide insight into how to use automation
effectively to assess PBT predicates. In particular, we discuss the steps we had
to take to beat human performance. We also provide insight into how to make the
automation work efficiently. Finally, we present a much richer account than
prior work of how students did. Grounding: Our methods are grounded in
mathematical logic. We also make use of well-understood principles of test
generation from more formal specifications. This combination ensures the
soundness of our work. We use standard methods to measure performance.
Importance: As both educators and programmers, we believe PBT is a valuable tool
for students to learn, and its importance will only grow as more developers
appreciate its value. Effective teaching requires a clear understanding of
student knowledge and progress. Our methods enable a rich and automated analysis
of student performance on PBT that yields insight into their understanding and
can capture misconceptions. We therefore expect these results to be valuable to
educators.
