Title: Explainable Software Defect Prediction: Are We There Yet?
Authors: Jiho Shin, Reem Aleithan, Jaechang Nam, Junjie Wang, Song Wang
ID: 2111.10901
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.10901

Abstract:
Explaining the prediction results of software defect prediction models is a
challenging while practical task, which can provide useful information for
developers to understand and fix the predicted bugs. To address this issue,
recently, Jiarpakdee et al. proposed to use {two state-of-the-art}
model-agnostic techniques (i.e., LIME and BreakDown) to explain the prediction
results of bug prediction models. Their experiments show these tools can
generate promising results and the generated explanations can assist developers
understand the prediction results. However, the fact that LIME and BreakDown
were only examined on a single software defect prediction model setting calls
into question about their consistency and reliability across software defect
prediction models with various settings. In this paper, we set out to
investigate the consistency and reliability of model-agnostic technique based
explanation generation approaches (i.e., LIME and BreakDown) on software defect
prediction models with different settings , e.g., different data sampling
techniques, different machine learning classifiers, and different prediction
scenarios. Specifically, we use both LIME and BreakDown to generate explanations
for the same instance under software defect prediction models with different
settings and then check the consistency of the generated explanations for the
instance. We reused the same defect data from Jiarpakdee et al. in our
experiments. The results show that both LIME and BreakDown generate inconsistent
explanations under different software defect prediction settings for the same
test instances, which makes them unreliable for explanation generation. Overall,
with this study, we call for more research in explainable software defect
prediction towards achieving consistent and reliable explanation generation.
