Title: Machine Learning-based Test Selection for Simulation-based Testing of Self-driving Cars Software
Authors: Sajad Khatiri, Christian Birchler, Bill Bosshard, Alessio Gambi, Sebastiano Panichella
ID: 2111.04666
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.04666

Abstract:
Abstract Simulation platforms facilitate the development of emerging
cyber-physical systems (CPS) like self-driving cars (SDC) because they are more
efficient and less dangerous than field operational tests. Despite this,
thoroughly testing SDCs in simulated environments remains challenging because
SDCs must be tested in a sheer amount of long-running test scenarios. Past
results on software testing optimization have shown that not all the tests
contribute equally to establishing confidence in test subjects' quality and
reliability, with some \uninformative" tests that can be skipped (or removed) to
reduce testing effort. However, this problem was partially addressed in the
context of SDC simulation platforms. In this paper, we investigate test
selection strategies to increase the cost-effectiveness of simulation-based
testing in the context of SDCs. We propose an approach called SDC-Scissor (SDC
coSt-effeCtIve teSt SelectOR), which leverages machine learning (ML) strategies
to identify and skip tests that are unlikely to detect faults in SDCs before
executing them. Specifically, SDC-Scissor extract features concerning the
characteristics of the test scenarios being executed in the simulation
environment and via ML strategies predict tests that lead to faults before
executing them. Our evaluation shows that SDC-Scissor achieved high
classification accuracy (up to 93.4%) in classifying tests leading to a fault
which allows improving testing cost-effectiveness: SDC-Scissor was able to
reduce (ca. 170%) the time spent in running irrelevant tests as well as
identified 33% more failure triggering tests compared to a randomized baseline.
Interestingly, SDC-Scissor does not introduce significant computational overhead
in the SDCs testing process, which is critical to SDC development in industrial
settings.
