Title: Representations of the (woman) judge: Hercules, the little mermaid, and the vain and naked Emperor
Authors: Erika Rackley
ID: openalex.W2065951554
URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1748-121x.2002.tb00671.x

This paper reconsiders images of the judge and, in particular, the position of
the woman judge using fairy tale and myth. It begins by exploring the actuality
of women's exclusion within the judiciary, traditional explanations for this and
the impact of recent changes. It goes on to consider the image of the Herculean
judge, arguing that whilst we may view him as an ideological construct, or even
as a fairy tale, we routinely deny this to ourselves and to others. This both
ensures the normative survival of Hercules and simultaneously constrains
counter-images of judges, including that of the woman judge, who becomes almost
a contradiction in terms, faced with the need to shed her difference and fit the
fairy tale. Like the little mermaid, the woman judge must trade her voice for
partial acceptance in the prince's world. This image of silencing which
Andersen's tale so vividly captures highlights a paradox in current discourses
of adjudication. On the one hand, women judges are viewed as desirable in order
to broaden the range of perspectives on the bench, thus making the judiciary
more representative; on the other hand, judges are supposed to be without
perspective, thus suggesting there is little need for a representative
judiciary. Feminists and other commentators negotiate their way uncomfortably
through this territory, acknowledging a gender dimension to adjudication, but
failing fully to confront its implications. This paper seeks to ‘undress’ the
judge, to flush out images of adjudication which deter or prevent women from
joining the judiciary and constrain their potential within it. It highlights
both the role of the imagination in existing conceptions of adjudication and the
increasing necessity for a re-imagined Hercules – an alternative understanding
of the judge which women and other groups currently underrepresented on the
bench can comfortably and constructively occupy.
