Title: Prenatal Maternal Attachment: The Lived Experience
Authors: Regina Leva-Giroux
ID: openalex.W4251660092
URL: https://doi.org/10.22371/07.2002.001

Prenatal maternal attachment and the practice of health promoting behaviors
during pregnancy are considered universal phenomena to women. Yet, the
understanding of these phenomena from the lived experiences of pregnant women
has not been well researched. The purpose of this phenomenological study was to
describe the experience of maternal attachment to the unborn child and how that
attachment might relate to the practice of these behaviors during pregnancy. The
participants in this study were ten English speaking women, college educated,
professionally employed, who were pregnant for the first time. Unstructured
interviews were conducted with the participants at 14–16 weeks and at 26–28
weeks gestation. The data was analyzed using procedural steps of the
phenomenological method. The themes that emerged through data analysis were:
awareness of a life-changing event, experiencing a mixture of feelings, being
protective, imaging a new life, being connected to this growing life,
experiencing the reality of the life within, creating a dream or fantasy, and
anticipating the birth. The awareness that this pregnancy would change their
lives created a mixture of feelings. From the moments after their pregnancies
were confirmed, these women embraced the awareness of the life inside of them
and began to practice health-promoting behaviors that provided a certain
reassurance for a healthy outcome. They were able to image the growing fetus
through their changing body features, in addition to feeling a strong physical
connectedness to this new life. Feeling the first fetal movements about 20 weeks
gestation, confirmed the reality of this life within them. Dreaming and
fantasizing occurred as more mental images of the baby were created, which
encouraged these women to begin anticipating the birth while continuing to focus
on a healthy outcome. The findings in this study shed new light on the
phenomenon of prenatal maternal attachment and suggest that health-promoting
behaviors may be an integral piece of the process of developing maternal
attachment. Since promoting the health of the mother and fetus is a focus of the
nursing role, further research about health teaching to foster these behaviors
needs to be generated.
