Title: Nutrition knowledge and food consumption: can nutrition knowledge change food behaviour?
Authors: Anthony Worsley
ID: openalex.W2132946348
URL: https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1440-6047.11.supp3.7.x

The status and explanatory role of nutrition knowledge is uncertain in public
health nutrition. Much of the uncertainty about this area has been generated by
conceptual confusion about the nature of knowledge and behaviours, and,
nutrition knowledge and food behaviours in particular. So the paper describes
several key concepts in some detail. The main argument is that 'nutrition
knowledge' is a necessary but not sufficient factor for changes in consumers'
food behaviours. Several classes of food behaviours and their causation are
discussed. They are influenced by a number of environmental and intra-individual
factors, including motivations. The interplay between motivational factors and
information processing is important for nutrition promoters as is the
distinction between declarative and procedural knowledge. Consideration of the
domains of nutrition knowledge shows that their utility is likely to be related
to consumers' and nutritionists' particular goals and viewpoints. A brief survey
of the recent literature shows that the evidence for the influence of nutrition
knowledge on food behaviours is mixed. Nevertheless, recent work suggests that
nutrition knowledge may play a small but pivotal role in the adoption of
healthier food habits. The implications of this overview for public health
nutrition are: (i) We need to pay greater attention to the development of
children's and adults' knowledge frameworks (schema building); (ii) There is a
need for a renewed proactive role for the education sector; (iii) We need to
take account of consumers' personal food goals and their acquisition of
procedural knowledge which will enable them to attain their goals; (iv) Finally,
much more research into the ways people learn and use food-related knowledge is
required in the form of experimental interventions and longitudinal studies.
