Title: Beyond the nation: Issues of identity in the contemporary narrative of Cuban women writing (in) the Diaspora
Authors: Yvette Fuentes
ID: openalex.W1577018925
URL: https://nsuworks.nova.edu/chass_facetd/1

This dissertation traces the narrative of contemporary Cuban women writers from
their early work published in Cuba through their Diaspora narratives. It
explores the discursive and narrative techniques that contemporary Cuban women
deploy in their narratives to challenge Cuba's dominant cultural constructions
of national and gendered identity. I posit that contemporary Cuban women's
narratives produced on and off the island display aislamiento (isolation) that
serves as a means of "talking back" to Cuba's patriarchal discourses. The
introduction presents an overview of recent debates on nation, gender and
identity within the context of contemporary Cuban literary history and feminist
theory. Chapter one examines the textual and discursive techniques Daína
Chaviano deploys in Fábulas de una abuela extraterrestre and El hombre, la
hembra y el hambre to expose and denounce dominant discourses on nation and
gender. In her insular and Diaspora narratives, Chaviano borrows from and
contests various literary works and traditions to rewrite Cuban history and the
Canon and "talk back" to those who have sought to construct and silence women.
Chapter two investigates the ways Zoé Valdés deconstructs Cuban history and its
national icons in order to represent Cubanness. Whereas the first part explores
the narrative techniques Valdés and Dulce María Loynaz apply in their novels
Sangre azul and Jardín, to contest traditional notions of nation and gender, the
second part analyzes La nada cotidiana and elucidates how this text debunks
Cuba's revolutionary icons. Chapter three examines the narrative and discursive
strategies Yanitzia Canetti utilizes in Al otro lado and Novelita Rosa to
represent and undermine gender and national identity. The conclusion offers some
insight into the future of Cuban Studies.
