Title: The formation of career identity in college students of pedagogical profile: personal determinants and interaction mechanisms.
Authors: Daniil Vladimirovich Borozinets
ID: openalex.W4410708522
URL: https://doi.org/10.7256/2454-0722.2025.2.74541

The article is dedicated to the current issue of studying the personal
determinants and interaction mechanisms that influence the formation of career
identity among college students in pedagogical profiles. Despite theoretical
work on specific aspects, the comprehensive impact of personal indicators, such
as various types of academic motivation, career-adaptive abilities, and
psychological attitudes towards learning, on the process of forming the career
identity of future educators, including the nature of mediating mechanisms,
remains underexplored. The aim of the study was to identify psychological
indicators that act as predictors of career identity in future educators at the
concluding stage of their education and the nature of their interrelationships.
The subject of the research was the process of career identity formation among
senior college students receiving secondary vocational education in pedagogical
fields. The research subject consisted of personal characteristics that predict
the formation of career identity in students of pedagogical colleges and the
nature of their interrelations. The sample consisted of 102 respondents—third-
year students from pedagogical colleges. A set of validated psychodiagnostic
questionnaires aimed at diagnosing psychological indicators of career identity,
types of academic motivation, career-adaptive abilities, and psychological
attitudes towards learning was used. Statistical processing included
correlational analysis, hierarchical multiple regression analysis, and analysis
of direct and indirect mediation effects. The scientific novelty of the study
lies in clarifying the complex relationship between various types of academic
motivation, career-adaptive abilities, and psychological attitudes as direct and
mediated predictors of career identity among students of pedagogical colleges.
It was found that self-esteem motivation and career adaptability indicators are
positive predictors of career identity formation, while introjected motivation
and perceived barriers to career identity formation are negative predictors.
Significant mediation effects were identified: developmental barriers completely
mediate the relationship between external motivation and career identity.
Additionally, introjected motivation serves as a mediator in the relationship
between self-development motivation and career identity, transforming the
potentially positive impact of the aspiration for self-development into a
negative one. The findings expand scientific understanding of the psychological
mechanisms of professional development among students in pedagogical colleges
and may serve as an additional source of scientific data for specialists
developing psycho-pedagogical support and accompaniment programs.
