Title: Vegetable consumption and promotion among school-age children and adolescents in West Africa: a systematic review and narrative synthesis
Authors: Kosisochukwu C. Igbokwe, Shirley Isibhakhomen Ejoh, Gideon Onyedikachi Iheme
ID: openalex.W4406253007
URL: https://doi.org/10.1017/s0007114524003301

Low vegetable consumption among school-age children and adolescents puts them at
risk of micronutrient malnutrition and non-communicable diseases. There is a
dearth of synthesised literature on vegetable intake and interventions to
promote increased consumption among this age group in West Africa. This study
pooled evidence on vegetable consumption and interventions to promote vegetable
consumption among school-age children and adolescents (6-19 years) in West
Africa. Quantitative and qualitative studies from 2002 to 2023 were
electronically searched in PubMed, African Journals Online (AJOL) and Google
Scholar databases. The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyses system was adhered to in reporting this review <b>(</b>PROSPERO
ID: CRD42023444444). The Joanna Briggs Institute critical evaluation tool was
used to appraise the quality of studies. Forty (40) studies met the search
criteria out of <i>n</i> 5080 non-duplicated records. Meta-analysis was not
possible due to high heterogeneity. Low vegetable consumption expressed in
frequency or amounts was recorded among school-age children and adolescents in
the reviewed studies. Intervention studies were mostly among adolescents; the
most common type of intervention was the use of nutrition education.
Insufficient evidence and high heterogeneity of studies reflect the need for
more high-quality interventions using globally identified standards but applied
contextually. School-age children appear to be an under-served population in
West Africa with regard to nutrition interventions to promote vegetable
consumption. There is a need for multi-component intervention studies that
encourage vegetable consumption as a food group. Gardening, parental
involvement, gamification and goal setting are promising components that could
improve the availability, accessibility and consumption of vegetables.
