Title: Editorial: Storytelling towards solidarity: Creative, hopeful, and inclusive climate change education
Authors: Catherine Walker, Ellen van Holstein, Natascha Klocker
ID: openalex.W4406850446
URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/1745-5871.12689

Geography is a discipline that speaks to students’ imaginations (Hammond et al.,
2022). However, for learners and educators, imagination can take shape against a
backdrop of existential ecological concern, where climate change “encompasses
and exacerbates nearly every other problem threatening human progress in the
twenty first century” (United Nations, 2014, p.30). Learners and educators are
exposed to an abundance of information about climate change that can be
divisive, impersonal, and difficult to process. Scholars increasingly
acknowledge that scientific accounts alone “do not offer relatable, connective
or inspiring accounts of human-climate relationships” (Verlie, 2022, p. 3). The
papers in this special section illustrate different ways in which storytelling
is helping learners and educators to understand their entanglements with climate
change across times and places, and to build collective responses with
solidarity at their centre. Together, the papers highlight valuable affordances
of stories and storytelling in the context of climate change education (CCE).
Stories generate empathy, enable personal and collective sense-making, and can
mobilise transnational solidarity. In a highly uneven global landscape of
climate vulnerability and agency, the papers also show different meanings of
climate justice for young people to address the climate crisis and its
complexity and the inequalities written therein. Our aim to create a collection
of storytelling papers themed around solidarity in CCE was motivated primarily
by the young people whom we have spoken to in our research and teaching, but it
also ties together calls for more attention to empathy, inclusivity, and
creativity in CCE. Scholars have advanced arguments to expand CCE beyond the
domain of scientific knowledge to better engage and support learners who report
feeling overwhelmed and anxious because of climate change (Baker et al., 2020;
Halstead et al., 2021; Trott, 2024; Verlie, 2022; Walker et al., 2022). Rousell
and Cutter-Mackenzie-Knowles (2020), p.203) have completed a systematic review
of CCE highlighting the marginalisation of arts and humanities in CCE and have
called for participatory and creative approaches that “empower children and
young people to meaningfully engage with entanglements of climate fact, value,
power and concern across multiple scales and temporalities” and that are “open
to radical and visionary alternatives for the future.” The capacity for stories
to open the imagination to alternative futures has been further explored by
those who have used speculative fiction in their research and teaching practice
(Bowman & Germaine, 2022; Finnegan, 2023). Other researchers have noted that
storytelling can inspire agency and action, opening space for communities to
imagine the kinds of futures they would like to see, and enabling community
members to bridge “the narrative gap between our ‘now’ and visions of the
future” (Veland et al., 2018, p.45). Opportunities to think and imagine
alternative futures with stories grounded in students’ everyday contexts are
particularly important in the context of climate anxiety, where students have
reported feeling hopeless because of government inaction and a sense of
paralysis (Hickman et al., 2021). Calls for storytelling in CCE are also
informed by arguments for transforming climate change communication.
Communication scholars have argued that scientific policy reporting creates
narratives that can be alienating to many (Bloomfield & Manktelow, 2021) and
that are often presented in ways that restrict the possibility of other
perspectives and agendas (de Meyer et al., 2021). Bloomfield and Manktelow
(2021) have argued that the use of storytelling conventions would allow
scientific reporting on climate change to follow a communication model that is
more engaging to wider publics and more action-oriented. However, arguments for
innovating climate storytelling extend beyond arguments to address how
scientific communications are structured to those that call for a much more
radical re-envisioning of the stories told about climate and ecological
breakdown, its causes and solutions. Reflecting on the concentration of stories
that veer between doom and technoscientific solutions in the context of fragile
human-environmental relationships, Kelly et al. (2022, p. xiv) have argued that
“it matters what stories tell stories”—that is, which stories of climate and
ecological change gain traction in contemporary societies, and who or what shape
these. Such examples of recent scholarship illustrate the powerful potential of
storytelling practices and the ways in which conventions and uneven access to
platforms on which to voice stories can hamper and enable this potential.
Attention to whose stories are heard and to what is being missed is core to the
essential decolonizing work taking place in geography education (Pirbhai-Illich
& Martin, 2022). Rethinking CCE in this way means moving from understanding
climate change primarily as a technological problem with technological solutions
to making sense of climate change through origin stories, Indigenous knowledges,
and learning from the Earth itself (Common Worlds Research Collective, 2020;
Fricker, 2024). It is essential to acknowledge the exclusion of Indigenous and
First Nations knowledge systems and practices from most formal CCE (Allen & Ní
Cassaithe, 2024; Pirbhai-Illich & Martin, 2022). Observing the history of
Australian education and considering what has been excluded by the separation of
people and Country, Fricker (2024, p. 169) has written that “by excluding the
environment beyond the classroom for learning, Western pedagogies effectively
excluded any possibility to incorporate learning through engaging with Country.”
Similarly, the Common Worlds Research Collective’s commentary, “Education for
future survival” (, 2020), reflects on how Cartesian models of education have
caused societies to lose connection with the Earth and put the survivability of
all planetary life at risk. Both Fricker (2024) and the Common Worlds Research
Collective (2020) have argued that reimagined education can reorient humanity
back to future survival. Storytelling is a fitting and accessible way to bring
diverse knowledge into classrooms and it is a technique that could be used much
more in CCE. From these lofty aims, this special section aims to demonstrate
that storytelling is an accessible practice for diverse individuals and groups
to create and share knowledge on climate change using stories’ interpersonal and
geographical affordances. In foregrounding geographical affordances, we are not
claiming that geography or geographers have an exclusive role in building more
hopeful and inclusive CCE. However, we echo arguments made in this journal by
Davidson et al. (2023) that geography has a central role to play in responding
to the complexity of climate change, and we see an openness to incorporate
storytelling into learning as part of the “renewed geographical education” that
those authors call for. Stories of climate change are inherently geographical:
they are rooted in, have been shaped by, and open listeners’ imaginations to
different times and places (including those imagined but not yet lived). The
multi-perspectival affordances of stories across time and space fit with
Andrews’ (2014) vision of stories as providing ways to connect “the real, the
not-real and the not-yet-real” by mobilising the narrative imagination. As well
as a temporal process, this is a spatial process, for “[q]uestions of space not
only direct us to where one is, but also to where one has been, and where one
might go - questions which are as much about physical realities as they are
connected to our innermost imaginaries” (Andrews, 2014, pp. 6–7). As becomes
evident in the papers that follow, stories offer ways to situate the effects of
climate change as people and place are interwoven in narratives that zoom in on
particular lives and relationships in time and space. We now outline the
contributions of the seven papers that form the special section. We then draw
out four affordances of storytelling illustrated by the papers: (1) imagining
alternatives; (2) enabling multi-way learning; (3) building solidarity across
difference; and (4) realising climate justice. We end this editorial by briefly
signposting some practical ways of using the methods and approaches in these
papers in different pedagogic contexts. The papers that comprise this special
section illustrate children and young people’s role as storytellers, as enablers
of others’ stories, and as critical and empathetic listeners. Eric Magrane’s
paper is a reflective narrative essay about coordinating an interdisciplinary
climate change communication class in a United States University. The author
describes the class as providing “a collaborative approach to climate change
education.” It comprises a public climate change speaker series where students
nominate and introduce speakers and a speculative storytelling activity in which
students imagine the year 2100 when people and societies have mitigated and
adapted to the climate crisis. Magrane’s paper includes extracts from students’
stories and reflects on the dialogues resulting from students’ willingness to
share their stories. The author concludes that stories and respectful dialogue
“have an important part to play in visualizing and realizing more just, lively
futures built on love and care.” In their paper, Sacha McMeeking and colleagues
supported Indigenous-led education methods for climate leadership and decision-
making in Christchurch, Aotearoa New Zealand. Through community-engaged action
research, they invited Māori and Pacific Elders to co-design workshops for young
people from those communities. Elders drew on established storytelling
practices, characters, and tropes to support participants’ understanding of
themselves and their communities as climate adaptation leaders. The authors
present this work as a continuation of the intergenerational storytelling
embedded in Māori and Pacific cultures. They argue that Indigenous storytelling
offers a more hopeful alternative to dominant narratives that veer between
climate catastrophe and redemption through science-led “solutionism.” Katie
Parsons and colleagues’ work is about UK-based learners and teachers’ responses
to two videos that tell the stories of flood-affected children in that country.
Those flood-affected children’s stories were collated into two videos that put
viewers in the shoes of two fictional characters. In workshops, young people
were asked to respond to and offer further suggestions for the development of
the videos. The author also interviewed secondary educators who had used the
videos with their classes. A key theme of the paper is how place-based stories
can be used across geographical contexts to support empathy- and action-informed
responses to flood risk preparedness and adaptation. The capacity for stories to
generate empathy through imagination is also taken up by Candice Satchwell and
colleagues. They tell the story of a collaboration between a school in northwest
England and a Fijian island where primary school pupils exchanged videos,
drawings, and letters to learn about the impacts of climate change where the
other children live. The paper shows how first-hand, peer-led insights into
different contexts can enhance children’s environmental education, bringing
climate change to life as a topic that affects real children across the world.
Rosamund Portus and colleagues’ paper reflects on children and young people as
researchers. It does so by presenting methodological insights into co-productive
research exploring young people’s sense of agency to influence climate change
policy in Finland, Ireland, Italy, and the United Kingdom. Focusing on the
experiences of young advisors to the project, the authors consider how co-
production can offer meaningful ways to share stories about climate crisis. They
observe how the advisors drew on their personal engagements and responses to the
climate crisis to aid project development. Whilst the paper’s main contribution
is to extend co-production methodologies, the authors reflect that young
people’s use of personal stories in the research was an integral part of the
project’s development. Carlie Trott’s paper is concerned with counter-stories
obscured by dominant narratives of ‘climate catastrophe’ and with critical
thinking about climate solutions that can be garnered from those counter-
stories. She draws on in-depth interviews with young climate activists in the
United States. In ways similar to work by McMeeking and colleagues in their
reflections on Indigenous storytelling, Trott has suggested that, in a context
where justice and action are little considered in CCE, young people’s “stories
into activism” could be used in educational settings “to activate learners’
political imaginations and spur their active engagement in societal
transformation.” Finally, Catherine Walker and colleagues draw on research
conducted with first- and second-generation migrants in Manchester, United
Kingdom, and Melbourne, Australia, to explore how parents and children who grew
up in places different from where they currently live now talk about climate
change. They analyse interviews that young people conducted with their first-
generation migrant parents and consider how the stories that parents embedded in
their interviews made their experiences relatable to their children, anchoring
them in children’s life-worlds by connecting to shared family memories. The
paper illustrates how young researchers saw potential for diverse transnational
knowledge (such as that shared by their parents) to inform how they and others
learn about climate change through storytelling. Across the papers, we identify
four ways that geographical storytelling contributes to more creative, hopeful,
and inclusive CCE. Storytelling can help expand ways of knowing and responding
to climate change, and that capacity is illustrated in this collection of
papers. As Trott (this issue) has observed, stories “form the foundational
structure of human thought processes, and thus shape our lives, how we make
sense of the world, how we see ourselves, what we think is possible, what we
wish for, and what we do.” In Magrane’s research, students were encouraged to
imagine a more climate secure 2100, and for the author, this speculative
activity showed “the kind of holistic thinking around the climate emergency that
our students were already clearly making” (Magrane, this issue). In research by
Satchwell and colleagues, a “friendly scientist” was on hand to respond to the
queries of the pupils, but not treated as singularly authoritative. These
approaches, and others in the papers that follow, show how pedagogic spaces can
become “spaces of listening, deliberation, debate, respect, imagination, and
trust” where different forms of climate knowledge are considered for their
utility to help learners bridge “the narrative gap between our ‘now’ and visions
of the future” (Veland et al., 2018, p. 45). Elsewhere in research presented in
this special section hearing stories seemed to spark or consolidate new ideas.
For in Walker et research, young researchers of how hearing stories made them
consider of climate adaptation and that they had not and they imagined how other
learners might from this McMeeking et al. have noted how Indigenous young
people’s imagination for collective action was by the storytelling of a of
Indigenous through the of community Together, the papers show that where diverse
ways of knowing are imagined alternatives to or narratives can be as
storytelling as an (Veland et al., 2018, p. 45). In this the special section the
potential of storytelling as a practice that can create an and imagination of
the different futures that We argue that this potential offers a for geographers
who are in enabling change through The papers about who is as about climate
change, and about between can take of the research different together to
generate or share often with individuals as storytellers, and listeners.
advisors on the project by Portus and colleagues were in the contributions as on
research narrative and to the of as well as educators for the research and and
use of a about what it is like to be a young through a time of climate emergency
the so researchers could and talk to young people as et al., this issue).
Similarly, this issue) has that students to speakers for the public climate
change series showed students that they were whose were and them and agency in
engaging in all of the climate change communication In Walker and colleagues’
research, family members from one and parents their children in their stories
when of children were a sense of openness and shared of the The papers also show
how inclusive storytelling for climate adaptation can be used to knowledge
rooted in from Aotearoa New McMeeking and colleagues have the of making space
for Indigenous communities to be to share stories on their as often Western
scientific approaches have to and stories in ways that to and knowledge support
Indigenous communities to tell their As the authors observed, the knowledge in
stories has wider and and can be into dialogue with Western The is on climate
learning across and with storytelling as the through which learning can be As in
Walker et paper, in contexts with through an openness to and learn from stories
of climate adaptation is a building empathy and on multi-way learning, the
papers in this special section a way for future geographical work that attention
to how diverse are and become in education can use this special section as a
research that into the multiple of and that are in storytelling. Such research
can much to that people be when what might be is not people’s to but access to a
and an that their The special section offers important insights into how
solidarity can be through storytelling and that and empathy play an important
part in this process. Parsons and colleagues, whose paper in this on children
and teachers’ responses to stories, have written of storytelling as a means to
open up “the of human experiences and new ways to engage and The authors young
concern for the and of the fictional children in the stories they them to the to
to practical and support for flood-affected Similarly, in Satchwell and
colleagues’ stories have been integral to learning about the lives of children
in geographical context and they the difficult topic of climate change to Both
of those papers examples of and of stories with scientific all of which are for
inclusive climate change Similarly, has written of between and students through
of one imagined Portus and colleagues have suggested that the research project
they with the active of young advisors made young people more to collaborative
ways of young that have become much better at building on bringing in new and on
how they had to see the climate crisis in more as one et al., this issue). The
special section thus attention the ways in which storytelling can new
relationships For geographers in climate change education, the special section
inform research into the ways stories can mobilise hopeful that solidarity and
collective The papers in this special section show the potential for
storytelling to to climate justice by learners to be more of the of climate
change. For insights shared by migrant parents young people to themselves and
the communities they are connected to in and through relationships of et al.,
this issue). Storytelling can also to climate justice by and learners to bring
justice about in their environment and in their contribution is because stories
offer to the Trott has how climate stories about climate justice might inspire
other young people to a on societal They have how in critical is approach to
storytelling that calls into and in to and that this issue). Trott’s work how
this approach to storytelling has been taken up by climate justice activists and
justice as a form of and how young stories could enable educators and learners
to climate this issue). McMeeking and colleagues (this issue) have that as
Indigenous young people which by engage with climate the of stories and
storytelling methods can be a way of climate justice by Indigenous communities
as agency, and that can generate for the communities concerned and the wider
These papers offer geographers to consider the potential of methods that engage
storytelling in research that to climate justice. storytelling is a stories
about climate change are being told in different ways around the world, in
classrooms and The special section diverse ways in which storytelling is being
used to build solidarity and to more creative, hopeful, and inclusive CCE. work
is particularly important in of some young people’s to engage with climate
change learning because of the with which it has become The papers also
highlight ways in which educators at all are using stories and storytelling to
their on climate change. Storytelling is and by and political in the spaces
where it and these and what kinds of and can be a part of school It is that all
of the research in this special section has been conducted or of formal
educational when and were supported by for the storytelling taking place of
classrooms to ways of thinking about climate change. Such the of between and
wider practices of community learning (Allen & Ní Cassaithe, 2024; Fricker, and
we more researchers to build In this we have to highlight the geographical
affordances of storytelling for building more hopeful, and creative CCE, and we
to reflect further on these affordances in the context of their teaching and
research we this special section inspire educators, and members of the
communities of which they are part to consider the ways that storytelling can
build solidarity in the of realising climate justice. The papers in this special
section were presented in a by the authors at the the of at in The authors wish
to in at Research for support for this special and for its is not to this as new
were or in this
