Title: Taboos as Drivers for Counterculture: Normalizing Misogyny in Incel Communities and Beyond
Authors: Mihaela Popa‐Wyatt, Justina Berškytė
ID: openalex.W4409461207
URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/josp.12610

Countercultures are defined in opposition to the mainstream. They permit the
exploration, promotion, and adoption of ideas and practices placed outside the
status quo. One way to do so is by exploiting taboo utterances that are
prohibited in mainstream culture. We define taboo utterances as those that
either constitute socially prohibited acts (e.g., slurs), express elements of a
prohibited ideology (e.g., claims advocating the subjugation of women), or
promote socially prohibited actions (e.g., violence against women). Such
transgressive utterances help create, negotiate, and reproduce countercultural
roles and ideologies. Adopting a countercultural role can function as an act of
resistance that seeks to redefine the mainstream community's standards, values,
and expectations. In this paper, we explain this process by building on a
framework of social role revision put forth by Berškytė and Popa-Wyatt (2025).
In their account, reclaimed slurs and self-derogatory terms are critical to
revising in-group social roles. We expand on this proposal in two ways: (i) we
show that taboo utterances can also be used to revise these roles; (ii) we
extend the mechanism of role revision not only for the in-group but also for the
out-group. Our contribution is to show how exploiting taboo utterances can help
construct ideological roles both for in-groups and out-groups which, we argue,
are key drivers to reproducing countercultural ideologies. These ideological
roles enrich the landscape of social roles. We proceed as follows. Section 2
outlines how taboos affect countercultures. We describe the different functions
of taboos and how they might be exploited to resist or challenge mainstream
norms, values, and expectations. In Section 3, we outline social roles,
highlighting mechanisms for reproducing or revising unjust social roles. In
Section 4, we introduce our case study of the manosphere incel (involuntary
celibate) counterculture. The manosphere is a collection of online spaces united
by its misogynistic and anti-feminist rhetoric. One such space consists of
forums hosting manosphere incels, that is, men who desire but are unable to
obtain an intimate relationship and place the blame for their failure on women.
Incels adopt a nihilistic ideology (known as the blackpill1), perpetuating the
narrative that one's immutable features and women's shallow nature relegate
incels to a permanent low social standing. We end with brief ethical
implications by considering how these countercultural norms might extend and
normalize beyond the incel counterculture (Section 5). We conclude in Section 6.
Taboos are prohibitions on transgressive behavior: they function to delineate
acceptable and unacceptable behaviors within a group, community, or society.
They thus act as a boundary for what can be said or done, typically concerning
issues that violate moral and social norms.2 Several ingredients make up the
anatomy of a taboo. First, the tabooed language or behavior is transgressive. It
goes against deep-seated beliefs; it can threaten moral codes; or it can violate
prevailing social norms in a group, community, or society. Second, the violation
of taboos can cause varying degrees of upset, unease, discomfort, offense, or
harm. A more transgressive taboo is likely to cause more upset. Third, the
social order is restored by imposing sanctions on the transgressor. Fourth,
transgressions need to be policed to ensure compliance. Given these factors, we
can understand taboo as a regulatory mechanism that seeks to maintain the status
quo of a given social order. Taboos are also drivers for social change.
Noncompliance through taboo-violation can be as important as compliance with
taboos. Essentially, by breaking taboos one not only challenges prevailing norms
but also seeks to explore, promote, and adopt ideas and practices placed outside
the status quo. This opens up the door for new social arrangements—both for good
and ill. For example, the continuous transgression of taboos related to
homosexuality contributed to the dissolving of the taboo such that same-sex
marriage is more widely adopted. On the other hand, Trump's utterance of “grab
them 'em by the pussy” violated the taboo of prohibiting sexual assault; making
it more permissible to speak of and treat women in a misogynistic manner. Taboo-
violation can challenge norms of fairness and decency in progressive societies.
Breaking a taboo against racist speech signals disrespect for norms of racial
equality, thus disadvantaging target group members who are treated as having
lesser social standing. This has been a critical mechanism for prohibitionist
accounts of slurs, which defend that slurs offend simply because they are taboo
(Anderson and Lepore 2013). Similarly, swear words, expletives, profanities,
obscenities, insults, and other derogatory language may cause offense because
they are prohibited in polite society.3 The speaker signals a transgressive
intention to break the rule of what is permissible to say or do, and that, in
and of itself, can upset and offend. Taboo violation can also function as a tool
to expose harmful norms and practices. This works as a form of protest, pushing
against perceived injustices. A notable example is Sinead O'Connor's 1992
performance on Saturday Night Live, where she tore up a picture of Pope John
Paul II. This bold gesture was intended to expose the rampant practices of child
abuse within the Catholic Church, condemning it as deserving of moral outrage
(McCabe 2023). By breaking the taboo of publicly disrespecting religious
authority, O'Connor not only took a stand against the hypocrisy masked by the
Church's sanctity but also dared to confront religious corruption head-on. By
questioning the unchallenged reverence for clerical values, her act was a
political statement seeking to unmask the institution's failure to uphold
justice. Her transgressive act was powerful because it was also an expression of
solidarity with the victims of abuse and their families, amplifying their voices
in a public outcry for accountability and reform. Change can be brought about
not only through taboo-violation but also through taboo-exploitation. While
breaking taboos involves disrupting prevailing social norms, exploiting taboos
involves re-purposing those norms to achieve different outcomes. For example,
slur terms can sometimes be appropriated by the very groups they target, thereby
putting them to a different use. Anderson and Lepore (2013, 42) argue that
reclaimed slurs introduce an embargo, or a “defeasible escape clause,” on the
taboo associated with a slur term such that the offense is defused. Similarly
for swear words, expletives, profanities, insults, and so forth, which can
enable conditions for emotional bonding and camaraderie. For example, two
friends exchanging vulgarities and obscenities in private signal they intend no
harm, thus re-purposing the taboo to express strong positive affect that could
not be conveyed otherwise. This is because shifts in context enable new usages
with new meanings. Exploiting taboos through swear words can serve not only an
expressive function but also as a signal of identity (Allan 2023). For example,
a student swearing at their teachers will be perceived as a troublemaker, and
this role will become part of their identity. Exploiting taboos can also
function as a mechanism of in-group signaling, whereby individuals signal
allegiance to a particular group of like-minded individuals, thereby reinforcing
their sense of belonging and shared values, and building solidarity. For
example, a group of teenagers using swear words among themselves do so to cement
their group identity as rebellious and show solidarity with one another—“we are
in it together.” This shows that tabooed language can serve as a mechanism to
foster group identity and a common understanding of shared values. As Stapleton
(2010, 298) writes, swearing is a “powerful, yet complex, resource for the
construction and display of group and individual identities.” These are powerful
identities because they are defined in reaction to prevailing norms and values
of polite society, thus forging alternative practices in which swearing is not
only permissible but becomes the norm. So far, we have shown that breaking and
exploiting taboos can perform several functions. Three are notable: (i)
denouncing or rejecting norms and values associated with the status quo in a
group, community, or society; (ii) forging and displaying (individual or group)
identity; (iii) in-group signaling to express solidarity within the community.4
We argue that these functions are instrumental in enabling countercultures to
emerge. By disrupting the status quo—that is, challenging, contesting, or
rejecting deep-seated beliefs, mainstream norms and values—countercultures
create conditions to forge their own practices and ideologies, with their own
sets of norms and values. The goal is to “reconstruct an alternative social
order that rejects or subverts those [mainstream] values and norms” (Cutler
2006, 238).5 Consider a hippie commune such as Drop City established in 1965.
Drop City embraced many stereotypical hippie practices such as “anarchy,
pacifism, sexual freedom, drugs, open membership, art” (Miller 1992, 87). In
this community, tabooed behaviors such as drug use and sexual freedom were not
only accepted but celebrated. The commune redefined these taboos as of freedom
and the behaviors the behaviors associated with or as the new taboos. far, we
have how taboo violation and can function as powerful to alternative practices
by mainstream norms and values to A key to explain the to alternative practices
is the of social roles and its roles and ideological roles. We outline the
social and roles and show how they can be or We in a by social practices that
the concerning social norms and roles that we to roles, as defined by Popa-Wyatt
and are that about permissible and social status to other and For example, one
might have a social role of a that will concerning the The has an status to
their them the to what the child what they what they have and so the to the
associated with their they might and have their roles in a the has the the child
is also by for example, to to the roles, social roles. A of social roles that we
adopt for the and of a are roles. roles, roles the status and that the of and We
can of role as a in a that in a as For example, our a the them their child has
been to the the by as the one on a role of an This role will make actions
permissible within a for example, it will be permissible for the to their child
and they will be to and a our is very for the and has the her is a in her for
the roles a and emotional these features are also as of the role that she is for
the and of the This the in a where the of to her is For example, she could argue
with the their but this may the she could her and the of these are to her the
social role typically associated with women. of open to As in Section is one
mechanism whereby target group members terms and them with a positive This can
either within the target (e.g., reclaimed of the or extend to of (e.g.,
reclaimed of these two as and In target group members express and positive their
group by re-purposing the very used to seeks to the associated with a slur
thereby conditions to forge solidarity and camaraderie. is more and offense, or
is to create conditions for by the both for the themselves and who them as more
powerful by slur terms target group members to by of that have been used to and
them This target group members to the of by revising roles roles with the for
Berškytė and Popa-Wyatt explain how the slur term is used to revise the social
role of a women's social roles behaviors of and and a of sexual expression and
Popa-Wyatt So is used to slur they are roles, their failure to these social
(e.g., such roles social roles for women within society. By with women in the
such roles. of to role to women who express their and sexual and Popa-Wyatt 5).
This new role to revise roles for women roles that are of social to express not
be for sexual violence against and Popa-Wyatt 5). The public nature and of these
the new roles society. While not or they a that women to more challenge such The
resistance of women to the of social the mainstream the way for a understanding
of as in social and Popa-Wyatt 5). public to challenge the social order by
revising social roles for women. public acts of social or public are not
individuals or groups may These a to challenge and taboos the of prevailing have
become key for countercultures to where of taboos foster against mainstream
culture. One example is the incel we will how the revision of social roles
functions within incel to and their counterculture. for are individuals who
desire but are unable to obtain incels can be of and our is on a of men who
express misogynistic on a incel of a misogynistic incel as who is unable to a
sexual or relationship with a we to these individuals in as we how and
exploiting taboos can create conditions for incels to redefine the roles they
mainstream on and these roles what we term at their sense of The involves
building an online where breaking mainstream taboos is not only but This the of
a counterculture with its own where taboos are to roles for incels, and of These
ideological roles transgressive reinforcing of failure as women as and those who
We by individuals might be to incel A key in with Incels themselves as by
mainstream (e.g., by to their to to and incels themselves as to up to roles
defined women. is to and is for the and Popa-Wyatt and intimate which incels
unable to to their sexual which their sense of to women. This can to what and
describe as role as and sometimes to These issues are by taboos that open on
sexual and social Such taboos have a First, sexual is as it challenges the of as
a and for to an role of a This is by both men and women. For example, who have
yet to in intimate social as low sexual status a of status and and This sense of
incels to social and in online of like-minded individuals where they shared have
only as an incel only to it a against incels as by the forums a space for
members to their and of This sense of a and the of the very that make the a
place can also foster conditions for harmful norms, by a ideology that and The
ideology in opposition to the which incels with mainstream and social roles. The
of is the The where the a the which for what it is, or the which to in a of The
of the for example, up and their own adopt the which is in that women's have
While the through and for the the ideology which the of incels the what it and
is that failure is to immutable or and 2023). ideology is through the of is as a
form of where men on are a social by in incel that women desire This in their
they blame women for this them in the role of and and their sense of and and to
their perceived of incels the of is the that women to more For example, a of an
is to a of the she will more This the that men with are Incels this to what they
as by which they women to men ideology thus perceived in a and that women as and
at are both by incels and as no ideology rejects the for that only women's can
their (e.g., of violence for or of women's such incels themselves with no of by
the of manosphere incels in online forums where taboos related to and are the of
their countercultural identity. The online incels a sense of and a space where
they can and they We that incels taboos to construct and transgressive
ideological roles that mainstream norms and values in this The of this online on
the they and thus exploiting taboos is a mechanism to these transgressive
ideological We on ideological roles that are critical in and reproducing the (i)
roles for (ii) roles for (iii) roles for of We the taboos that incels in these
roles and how these to the of their countercultural One taboo that incels is the
very one that them to in online countercultural the taboo of to achieve or about
their perceived in sexual and social incels these to foster a sense of belonging
and status within the They features about themselves that they to their to one's
is what which is the process of and one's in this process incels to a low of
resistance against their perceived adopt a not to by in to themselves
accountability and The derogatory terms function to roles to within the These
terms the among incels that they are of women because their make them By using
these incels mainstream values such as a permanent incel identity. This to and
an ideological an them of their this role challenges mainstream of and a
countercultural that is to that the roles are ideological As Berškytė and Popa-
Wyatt and Popa-Wyatt because the role that incels construct through their
language social the target community, is to no of the and it is not a role in
mainstream the role of a that is, one which is by only in the target The incel
of with mainstream with its countercultural as countercultures typically on a
that the its Incels a of in a that was both and a way to their belonging to the
By their own and incels were to social status as a and their belonging to the in
the for status and within the community, incels are to and The more a and the
more they the they themselves and are perceived by as the As with community,
those with status and As a and as a incel becomes This in an to become more and
more transgressive and Incels taboos against and thereby rejecting mainstream
norms that women with and or at the very and we the roles that women are these
terms is the construction of an ideological role that is given to women. First,
women are as and only for Second, on the ideological women are as This the which
claims that women the sexual and the ideology the use of transgressive language
about and this in the countercultural narrative that women are the In roles in
(e.g., the ideological role of women also the ideological role of the Incels are
as victims who themselves their and in practices of resistance that the and
status within the community, incels are to make speech As a is positive for more
misogynistic whereby members for using what as taboo in mainstream new social in
the incel community, a of group shared values, and common The ideological roles
for women promote making the and within the ideological role is that to
individuals violence is by incel In mainstream society, it is taboo to those who
have as a for to obtain an intimate The of such are as outside what is
acceptable or incels taboos against or those for acts of of By in transgressive
that and or of incels positive roles to these These roles are by a of and a
sense of For example, the to violence (e.g., a and these men as or They
themselves as in against women or which they as Such roles are through a
narrative that men as victims of and to a sense of in their or the mainstream
roles for of the ideological roles these individuals in a positive Such positive
of of make it for those members who do not violence to challenge actions of
these Such challenge in could be as a taboo within the The roles to in to the
role for women. As women are as the for and violence at women is perceived as
that will their of by themselves as for their against the use of and roles for
themselves as or This their cause as part of a resistance pushing against which
they are the of their in using transgressive language that mainstream members of
the roles to incels, and of These roles revise roles for men and the out-groups
in a way that and the countercultural The role of a for example, the that incels
by to to the social role of a The ideological role of an incel and the narrative
that immutable one the sexual The ideological roles for women them in a and
manner. The construction of a role of for women at the incels their Such roles
the narrative that is that incels can do to their low and they they might by the
the language and of a ideological role of a the not for the construction of such
roles to that the victims the violence they and that violence is to be
celebrated. In new prohibitions that those of mainstream culture. For positive
of or other groups (e.g., is with and social sanctions within the of for
example, a highlighting the of and with can in the the that challenges the
narrative becomes a new taboo. The the is to the more transgressive it will is
to these individuals to mainstream or their own they have to do so outside the
of the Given the social to of roles in mainstream society, the of the incels
with no space to values and this an for many to by the of the counterculture. In
by exploiting mainstream taboos and new incels a new social incel and are the We
to a on the ethical implications of the and of within incel and the are about
the of in but we on two First, how become within these For example, members are
to their use of language advocating violence against women as a way of their
change. Second, can this within incel mainstream this of and a status is within
the group by strong to the norms, and in positive for for to or an in which
members are to become more about having or a relationship with them because them
have to need to make the that on the is a for also a that to with a because it a
of is and with women can simply and the The we to is the for to beyond incel We
that is a of in mainstream in and so also social in of the outrage of the using
the term in Section The of incel is not to incels in opposition to this
mainstream The is to on it to create an in which violence and are the and
acceptable to to their is a misogynistic but it has as its the subjugation of
not their We that this counterculture the and thus taboos against The narrative
has thus the to normalize and social sanctions associated with incel
counterculture is only one group in the manosphere that in several groups and to
this and mainstream for example, We that incel counterculture and the with their
to and can create conditions for to become not only but As a mainstream can
become in misogynistic such that what was or can become and For example, this
can to harmful sexual violence by women's their of and violence against women.
of behaviors can to abuse and harmful speech at women. These issues have been a
for how misogynistic shifts social for example, shows how misogynistic
utterances in a and contribution to a of have the harmful of such as slurs, and
how these to reinforcing by members of target groups Popa-Wyatt These a
framework for understanding how can mainstream and become This the of
considering for not only but also these goes beyond the of this In this paper,
we that the of taboos can serve as a mechanism for building a that on the and in
opposition mainstream culture. We used the incel as a case A of this is that its
of prohibitions misogynistic speech and behavior serve to signal their of
mainstream norms and values. We that both self-derogatory and derogatory
language function as for members to status within the and signal their to the In
this incels forge an in-group identity in opposition to the roles by they unable
to to this group identity is the that taboo utterances enable incels to their
status within the and cement a group identity. This a where prevailing norms and
values the of misogynistic and the of sexual violence against women. we how
beyond the of incel mainstream highlighting that to the of in society. We are
very to the of this for their and We to extend our to the for and and the of for
the that contributed this This was the in The by the of The no of
