Title: Economic Income as a Cause of Stunting: an Analysis Based on the Perspective of Karl Marx: Literature Review
Authors: Sarifudin Andi Latif, Arlin Adam, Syamsu A Kamaruddin
ID: openalex.W4410350667
URL: https://doi.org/10.35816/jiskh.v14i1.1231

Introduction: Stunting begins to appear when the child is two years old and
begins when the fetus is still in the womb. The increase in child morbidity and
mortality is the impact caused by the incidence of stunting. Stunting children
will be able to experience disturbances in their intelligence level,
susceptibility to diseases, decreased productivity, and stunted economic growth,
which impacts poverty. Method: This study is a literature review using the
PRISMA method. Articles published in 2022-2024 were found by conducting database
searches (Garuda and Google Scholar) and using the keywords "Stunting" and
"Economic Income," and limited to using Chi-Square analysis so that articles
meet the criteria for analysis, as many as 10 articles. Results: The search
results for the ten articles were obtained, all stating the relationship between
economic income and stunting. The author claims that Karl Marx's point of view
highlights this problem as a social problem from a social system that subjugates
a particular economic class. Dependence on the wage system, inadequate social
security, and the exploitation of labor by capitalism trap many proletarian
families in a cycle of poverty. This leaves children in these homes vulnerable
to chronic malnutrition, which adversely affects their physical and cognitive
development. Conclusion: The problem of low economic income in society as the
cause of stunting is not only technical interventions, such as supplementary
nutrition programs, but rather more fundamental structural changes, as seen from
a Marxist perspective. Systematic reduction of economic inequality and stunting
prevention can be achieved through wealth redistribution, wage system
improvement, and labor exploitation elimination.
