Title: Game-Based Storytelling with a Robot Character: Activating Computational Thinking in Young Children
Authors: María Esther del Moral Pérez, Nerea López‐Bouzas, Jonathan Castañeda Fernández
ID: openalex.W4410535555
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10643-025-01930-x

Abstract Computational thinking (CT), defined through its dimensions of
abstraction, generalization, algorithmic thinking, and evaluation, fosters
cognitive skills for solving problems logically and systematically, preparing
individuals for the challenges of the digital society, where interaction with
machines is essential. This empirical pre-experimental study arises from an
individualized intervention with students aged 4–6 (N = 82), aimed at measuring
their level of CT. Its originality lies in involving them in a story featuring a
robot, whose mission is to help a turtle recover its habitat. To achieve this,
they must program the robot to follow a predetermined route and overcome various
challenges. Thus, the CT-Robot-DST scale was designed and validated, consisting
of 14 indicators with 4 performance levels, to record the observed level of CT
during the intervention (27′ 30′′ per child). This scale assesses their skills
in task planning and sequencing, logical reasoning, lateralization, spatial
orientation, understanding and identifying the buttons to program the robot’s
movements, memorization, counting, eye-hand coordination, problem-solving,
effectiveness, and engagement with the story. The results show that the majority
of the students engaged in the story, expressed interest in planning and
executing the required tasks, successfully programmed the robot, solved
problems, and overcame the proposed challenges. Thus, 78.1% of the students
scored close to the high CT level. The more autonomous students performed
better. Undoubtedly, this intervention, focused on completing various tasks
structured around a narrative featuring a robot, represents an innovative
approach that involves students in the storyline to solve the challenges.
