Title: Narrative styles adopted by mothers when telling a known story to their preschool-aged children: A qualitative study from Sri Lanka
Authors: Yashodha K. K. Hettiarachchi, Pujitha Wickramasinghe, Tamara Handy, Christina Reuterskiöld
ID: openalex.W4413985892
URL: https://doi.org/10.53378/irssr.353243

Storytelling plays an important role in children’s overall development and
wellbeing. Using stories to assess language allows for the simultaneous
evaluation of both receptive and expressive language skills, which are essential
for identifying developmental language delays and informing suitable educational
or therapeutic support. Without age-appropriate narrative skill, children would
struggle to achieve desired communication as well as academic goals. Cultural
and language differences in narrative styles are also linked to children’s
literacy. Since children learn from the immediate environment, maternal
storytelling practices strongly influence children’s language and socioemotional
development. We explore the narrative styles employed by Sri Lankan mothers when
telling a known story to their preschool aged children. Twenty mother-child
dyads were video-recorded when mothers told the story of the hare and the
tortoise to preschool aged children, using a wordless picture sequence.
Observational notes were taken focusing on the different strategies used by
mothers to facilitate the child’s development through storytelling. All videos
were transcribed verbatim and was reviewed multiple times. Reflexive thematic
analysis was used to acknowledge the researcher’s influence on data
interpretation. Three key themes emerged: inferring the shared familiarity of
the story, engaging the children as co-narrators, and moral framing through
storytelling. The findings reflect how mothers, as primary caregivers, use
different narrative styles to effectively involve children, support their
language and transfer moral values in storytelling. This could inform the design
of culturally relevant narrative assessments and parent-training programmes to
stimulate children’s language development.
