Title: Use of screens, books and adults’ interactions on toddler’s language and motor skills: A cross-cultural study among 19 Latin American countries from different SES
Authors: Lucas G. Gago Galvagno, Ángel Manuel Elgier, Ángel Tabullo, Edson Jorge Huaire Inacio, Angela M. Herrera-Alvarez
ID: openalex.W4407174148
URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314569

Children's screen use is ubiquitous, with toddlers in particular demonstrating
increases after the pandemic and negative associations with cognitive abilities.
Thus, the objective of this cross-cultural study was to broaden and deepen
existing results by describing Latin American toddlers' screen use and its
association with parental reports of language skills, developmental milestones,
and sociodemographic variables. A sample of 1878 toddlers from 12 to 48 months
(M.age = 27.55, SD = 9.68, male = 933, low-SES = 945) from 19 different Latin
American countries was evaluated. Parent-report measures of children's use of
screens, SES, language, and developmental milestones were administered virtually
or face-to-face. Results indicated that infants' screen exposure times were
longer than recommended, with TV and smartphone being the most frequent screen
media among them. Also, most of the screen time was shared with an adult. These
results were consistent across parent-reported SES and nationality. In addition,
negative and significant associations were generally found between screen time
and language skills, which were in turn positively associated with shared
reading times. The frequency of shared screen use with adults demonstrated
positive correlations with language skills, after controlling for
sociodemographic variables. Lastly, entertainment and educational content was
associated with higher levels of language skills compared to music. In
conclusion, this study demonstrates the importance of promoting responsible and
accompanied use of screens with age-appropriate content during the first years
of life across different contexts.
