Title: Forging Dialogue through Fiction: Exploring Feminist Resilience in Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni’s &lt;i&gt;The Palace of Illusions&lt;/i&gt;
Authors: Anand Kumar, Punit Sharma
ID: openalex.W4410045328
URL: https://doi.org/10.56062/gtrs.2025.4.02.875

One of the well-known Indian American writers, Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni's
writings mainly address women's experiences in a highly compelling manner,
documenting the unique experiences of women and the patriarchal structures of
oppression they had to go through in their lives. For example, in her famous
works as The Palace of Illusions and The Forest of Enchantments Divakaruni
retells old Hindu myths and offers new interpretations through the voices of her
female characters. Those voices reinforce the problems that women have to face
in life: their struggles, ambitions, and conflicts within the boundaries set by
society. This paper explores The Palace of Illusions to critically analyse how
the character of Draupadi critiques and challenges patriarchal norms. Through a
feminist lens, it probes at her resilience. This central narrative force brought
to light her role in calling into question the deeply entrenched structures of
the male-dominated society. Divakaruni retells the story of the Mahabharata from
Draupadi's point of view, thus giving her agency and autonomy in an epic that is
a male-centric story. This paper heralds the complex character of Draupadi, from
her unusual birth to her bold decisions and actions, and depicts her as a symbol
of strength and resistance against oppression. In analysing some crucial events
of this novel, like the public humiliation of Draupadi and her vow for justice,
this study emphasizes the challenges that lie ahead of us in the form of
entrenched gender inequalities. This paper finally argues that The Palace of
Illusions is a significant contribution to feminist literary analysis by
challenging patriarchal conventions and celebrating the unrelenting spirit of
female resilience embodied in Draupadi.
