Title: A Study of how the Protagonists of Films Suitable for Cinema Therapy Sessions with Students Addresses His Emotional or Psychological Issues: A Case Study of Young Orion from the Film Orion and the Dark
Authors: Karuppiah Saravanapperumal, Dr V.Ilamparithi
ID: openalex.W4414862032
URL: https://doi.org/10.51244/ijrsi.2025.120800285

The protagonists of films have a key role to play in taking forward the plots of
the films. This is due to the reason that the stories of the films always
revolve around them. In addition to this, the obstacles and the enemies they
face play a key role in both the progression of the stories and also of their
personal character arcs. Sometimes, the character arcs of the protagonists
sometimes also change throughout the films, correcting their flaws and evolving
into better persons. These arcs are called as morally ascending character arcs.
Such types of arcs are important for films to be chosen for cinema therapy. This
is due to the reason as these types of characters who successfully manage their
emotional and psychological problems, can be easily related to by the students
or clients. They also play a key role in aiding in their successful recovery
from emotional and psychological issues. This study will be analysing the
development of the character arc of the protagonist young Orion from the film
Orion and the Dark . It would also study how the change in his character arc
relate to him solving his emotional and psychological issues, which are similar
to those faced by the students or clients in cinema therapy. This study utilises
a mixed methodology of a case study approach and the methodology of qualitative
content analysis based on the 12 stages of a Hero’s Arc Journey according to
Christopher Vogler. The results of the study found that the film depicted young
Orion overcoming his emotional or psychological issues in a very gradual and
realistic way which could be related to by the school going children watching
the film for cinema therapy.
