Title: VolTS: A Volatility-based Trading System to forecast Stock Markets Trend using Statistics and Machine Learning
Authors: Ivan Letteri
ID: 2307.13422
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.13422

Volatility-based trading strategies have attracted a lot of attention in
financial markets due to their ability to capture opportunities for profit from
market dynamics. In this article, we propose a new volatility-based trading
strategy that combines statistical analysis with machine learning techniques to
forecast stock markets trend.   The method consists of several steps including,
data exploration, correlation and autocorrelation analysis, technical indicator
use, application of hypothesis tests and statistical models, and use of variable
selection algorithms. In particular, we use the k-means++ clustering algorithm
to group the mean volatility of the nine largest stocks in the NYSE and NasdaqGS
markets. The resulting clusters are the basis for identifying relationships
between stocks based on their volatility behaviour. Next, we use the Granger
Causality Test on the clustered dataset with mid-volatility to determine the
predictive power of a stock over another stock. By identifying stocks with
strong predictive relationships, we establish a trading strategy in which the
stock acting as a reliable predictor becomes a trend indicator to determine the
buy, sell, and hold of target stock trades.   Through extensive backtesting and
performance evaluation, we find the reliability and robustness of our
volatility-based trading strategy. The results suggest that our approach
effectively captures profitable trading opportunities by leveraging the
predictive power of volatility clusters, and Granger causality relationships
between stocks.   The proposed strategy offers valuable insights and practical
implications to investors and market participants who seek to improve their
trading decisions and capitalize on market trends. It provides valuable insights
and practical implications for market participants looking to.
