Title: Managing ESG Ratings Disagreement in Sustainable Portfolio Selection
Authors: Francesco Cesarone, Manuel Luis Martino, Federica Ricca, Andrea Scozzari
ID: 2312.10739
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.10739

Sustainable Investing identifies the approach of investors whose aim is twofold:
on the one hand, they want to achieve the best compromise between portfolio risk
and return, but they also want to take into account the sustainability of their
investment, assessed through some Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG)
criteria. The inclusion of sustainable goals in the portfolio selection process
may have an actual impact on financial portfolio performance. ESG indices
provided by the rating agencies are generally considered good proxies for the
performance in sustainability of an investment, as well as, appropriate measures
for Socially Responsible Investments (SRI) in the market. In this framework of
analysis, the lack of alignment between ratings provided by different agencies
is a crucial issue that inevitably undermines the robustness and reliability of
these evaluation measures. In fact, the ESG rating disagreement may produce
conflicting information, implying a difficulty for the investor in the portfolio
ESG evaluation. This may cause underestimation or overestimation of the market
opportunities for a sustainable investment. In this paper, we deal with a multi-
criteria portfolio selection problem taking into account risk, return, and ESG
criteria. For the ESG evaluation of the securities in the market, we consider
more than one agency and propose a new approach to overcome the problem related
to the disagreement between the ESG ratings by different agencies. We propose a
nonlinear optimization model for our three-criteria portfolio selection problem.
We show that it can be reformulated as an equivalent convex quadratic program by
exploiting a technique known in the literature as the k-sum optimization
strategy. An extensive empirical analysis of the performance of this model is
provided on real-world financial data sets.
