Title: Masked Self-Supervision for Remaining Useful Lifetime Prediction in Machine Tools
Authors: Haoren Guo, Haiyue Zhu, Jiahui Wang, Vadakkepat Prahlad, Weng Khuen Ho et al.
ID: 2207.01219
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.01219

Abstract:
Prediction of Remaining Useful Lifetime(RUL) in the modern manufacturing and
automation workplace for machines and tools is essential in Industry 4.0. This
is clearly evident as continuous tool wear, or worse, sudden machine breakdown
will lead to various manufacturing failures which would clearly cause economic
loss. With the availability of deep learning approaches, the great potential and
prospect of utilizing these for RUL prediction have resulted in several models
which are designed driven by operation data of manufacturing machines. Current
efforts in these which are based on fully-supervised models heavily rely on the
data labeled with their RULs. However, the required RUL prediction data (i.e.
the annotated and labeled data from faulty and/or degraded machines) can only be
obtained after the machine breakdown occurs. The scarcity of broken machines in
the modern manufacturing and automation workplace in real-world situations
increases the difficulty of getting sufficient annotated and labeled data. In
contrast, the data from healthy machines is much easier to be collected. Noting
this challenge and the potential for improved effectiveness and applicability,
we thus propose (and also fully develop) a method based on the idea of masked
autoencoders which will utilize unlabeled data to do self-supervision. In thus
the work here, a noteworthy masked self-supervised learning approach is
developed and utilized. This is designed to seek to build a deep learning model
for RUL prediction by utilizing unlabeled data. The experiments to verify the
effectiveness of this development are implemented on the C-MAPSS datasets (which
are collected from the data from the NASA turbofan engine). The results rather
clearly show that our development and approach here perform better, in both
accuracy and effectiveness, for RUL prediction when compared with approaches
utilizing a fully-supervised model.
