Title: Testing SOAR Tools in Use
Authors: Robert A. Bridges, Ashley E. Rice, Sean Oesch, Jeff A. Nichols, Cory Watson et al.
ID: 2208.06075
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.06075

Abstract:
Modern security operation centers (SOCs) rely on operators and a tapestry of
logging and alerting tools with large scale collection and query abilities. SOC
investigations are tedious as they rely on manual efforts to query diverse data
sources, overlay related logs, and correlate the data into information and then
document results in a ticketing system. Security orchestration, automation, and
response (SOAR) tools are a new technology that promise to collect, filter, and
display needed data; automate common tasks that require SOC analysts' time;
facilitate SOC collaboration; and, improve both efficiency and consistency of
SOCs. SOAR tools have never been tested in practice to evaluate their effect and
understand them in use. In this paper, we design and administer the first
hands-on user study of SOAR tools, involving 24 participants and 6 commercial
SOAR tools. Our contributions include the experimental design, itemizing six
characteristics of SOAR tools and a methodology for testing them. We describe
configuration of the test environment in a cyber range, including network, user,
and threat emulation; a full SOC tool suite; and creation of artifacts allowing
multiple representative investigation scenarios to permit testing. We present
the first research results on SOAR tools. We found that SOAR configuration is
critical, as it involves creative design for data display and automation. We
found that SOAR tools increased efficiency and reduced context switching during
investigations, although ticket accuracy and completeness (indicating
investigation quality) decreased with SOAR use. Our findings indicated that user
preferences are slightly negatively correlated with their performance with the
tool; overautomation was a concern of senior analysts, and SOAR tools that
balanced automation with assisting a user to make decisions were preferred.
