Title: HERO: HiErarchical spatio-tempoRal reasOning with Contrastive Action Correspondence for End-to-End Video Object Grounding
Authors: Mengze Li, Tianbao Wang, Haoyu Zhang, Shengyu Zhang, Zhou Zhao et al.
ID: 2208.05818
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.05818

Abstract:
Video Object Grounding (VOG) is the problem of associating spatial object
regions in the video to a descriptive natural language query. This is a
challenging vision-language task that necessitates constructing the correct
cross-modal correspondence and modeling the appropriate spatio-temporal context
of the query video and caption, thereby localizing the specific objects
accurately. In this paper, we tackle this task by a novel framework called
HiErarchical spatio-tempoRal reasOning (HERO) with contrastive action
correspondence. We study the VOG task at two aspects that prior works
overlooked: (1) Contrastive Action Correspondence-aware Retrieval. Notice that
the fine-grained video semantics (e.g., multiple actions) is not totally aligned
with the annotated language query (e.g., single action), we first introduce the
weakly-supervised contrastive learning that classifies the video as
action-consistent and action-independent frames relying on the video-caption
action semantic correspondence. Such a design can build the fine-grained
cross-modal correspondence for more accurate subsequent VOG. (2) Hierarchical
Spatio-temporal Modeling Improvement. While transformer-based VOG models present
their potential in sequential modality (i.e., video and caption) modeling,
existing evidence also indicates that the transformer suffers from the issue of
the insensitive spatio-temporal locality. Motivated by that, we carefully design
the hierarchical reasoning layers to decouple fully connected multi-head
attention and remove the redundant interfering correlations. Furthermore, our
proposed pyramid and shifted alignment mechanisms are effective to improve the
cross-modal information utilization of neighborhood spatial regions and temporal
frames. We conducted extensive experiments to show our HERO outperforms existing
techniques by achieving significant improvement on two benchmark datasets.
