Title: Developer Perspectives on REST API Usability: A Study of REST API Guidelines
Authors: Sven Peldszus, Jan Rutenkolk, Marcel Heide, Jan Sollmann, Benjamin Klatt et al.
ID: 2601.16705
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.16705

Abstract:
REST is today's most widely used architectural style for providing web-based
services. In the age of service-orientation (a.k.a. Software as a Service
(SaaS)) APIs have become core business assets and can easily expose hundreds of
operations. While well-designed APIs contribute to the commercial success of a
service, poorly designed APIs can threaten entire organizations. Recognizing
their relevance and value, many guidelines have been proposed for designing
usable APIs, similar to design patterns and coding standards. For example,
Zalando and Microsoft provide popular REST API guidelines. However, they are
often considered as too large and inapplicable, so many companies create and
maintain their own guidelines, which is a challenge in itself. In practice,
however, developers still struggle to design effective REST APIs. To improve the
situation, we need to improve our empirical understanding of adopting, using,
and creating REST API guidelines. We present an interview study with 16 REST API
experts from industry. We determine the notion of API usability, guideline
effectiveness factors, challenges of adopting and designing guidelines, and best
practices. We identified eight factors influencing REST API usability, among
which the adherence to conventions is the most important one. While guidelines
can in fact be an effective means to improve API usability, there is significant
resistance from developers against strict guidelines. Guideline size and how it
fits with organizational needs are two important factors to consider. REST
guidelines also have to grow with the organization, while all stakeholders need
to be involved in their development and maintenance. Automated linting provides
an opportunity to not only embed compliance enforcement into processes, but also
to justify guideline rules with educational explanations.
