Title: Developers in the Age of AI: Adoption, Policy, and Diffusion of AI Software Engineering Tools
Authors: Mark Looi
ID: 2601.21305
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.21305

Abstract:
The rapid advance of Generative AI into software development prompts this
empirical investigation of perceptual effects on practice. We study the usage
patterns of 147 professional developers, examining perceived correlates of AI
tools use, the resulting productivity and quality outcomes, and developer
readiness for emerging AI-enhanced development. We describe a virtuous adoption
cycle where frequent and broad AI tools use are the strongest correlates of both
Perceived Productivity (PP) and quality, with frequency strongest. The study
finds no perceptual support for the Quality Paradox and shows that PP is
positively correlated with Perceived Code Quality (PQ) improvement. Developers
thus report both productivity and quality gains. High current usage, breadth of
application, frequent use of AI tools for testing, and ease of use correlate
strongly with future intended adoption, though security concerns remain a
moderate and statistically significant barrier to adoption. Moreover, AI testing
tools' adoption lags that of coding tools, opening a Testing Gap. We identify
three developer archetypes (Enthusiasts, Pragmatists, Cautious) that align with
an innovation diffusion process wherein the virtuous adoption cycle serves as
the individual engine of progression. Our findings reveal that organizational
adoption of AI tools follows such a process: Enthusiasts push ahead with tools,
creating organizational success that converts Pragmatists. The Cautious are held
in organizational stasis: without early adopter examples, they don't enter the
virtuous adoption cycle, never accumulate the usage frequency that drives
intent, and never attain high efficacy. Policy itself does not predict
individuals' intent to increase usage but functions as a marker of maturity,
formalizing the successful diffusion of adoption by Enthusiasts while acting as
a gateway that the Cautious group has yet to reach.
