Title: Deriving and Validating Requirements Engineering Principles for Large-Scale Agile Development: An Industrial Longitudinal Study
Authors: Hina Saeeda, Mijin Kim, Eric Knauss, Jesper Thyssen, Jesper Ørting et al.
ID: 2602.10972
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.10972

Abstract:
In large scale agile systems development, the lack of a unified requirements
engineering (RE) process is a major challenge, exacerbated by the absence of
high level guiding principles for effective requirements management. To address
this challenge, we conducted a five year longitudinal case study with Grundfos
AB, in collaboration with the Software Centre in Sweden. RE principles were
first derived through qualitative data collection spanning more than 25 sprints,
approximately 320 weekly synchronisation meetings, and seven cross-company,
company-specific workshops between 2019 and 2024. These activities engaged
practitioners from diverse roles, representing several hundred developers across
domains. In late 2024, five in depth focus groups with senior leaders at
Grundfos provided retrospective validation of the principles and assessed their
strategic impact. We aim to (1) empirically examine RE principles in large scale
agile system development, (2) explore their benefits in practice within the case
company, and (3) identify a set of transferable RE principles for large scale
contexts. Using thematic analysis, six key RE principles architectural context,
stakeholder-driven validation and alignment, requirements practices in
large-scale agile organisations. evolution with lightweight documentation,
delegated requirements management, organisational roles and responsibilities,
and a shared understanding of requirements are derived. The study was further
validated through crosscompany expert evaluation with three additional
multinational organisations (Bosch, Ericsson, and Volvo Cars), which are
directly responsible for largescale requirements management. Together, these
efforts provide a scalable and adaptable foundation for improving requirements
practices in largescale agile organisations.
