Title: Reading Between the Code Lines: On the Use of Self-Admitted Technical Debt for Security Analysis
Authors: Nicolás E. Díaz Ferreyra, Moritz Mock, Max Kretschmann, Barbara Russo, Mojtaba Shahin et al.
ID: 2602.03470
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.03470

Abstract:
Static Analysis Tools (SATs) are central to security engineering activities, as
they enable early identification of code weaknesses without requiring execution.
However, their effectiveness is often limited by high false-positive rates and
incomplete coverage of vulnerability classes. At the same time, developers
frequently document security-related shortcuts and compromises as Self-Admitted
Technical Debt (SATD) in software artifacts, such as code comments. While prior
work has recognized SATD as a rich source of security information, it remains
unclear whether -and in what ways- it is utilized during SAT-aided security
analysis. OBJECTIVE: This work investigates the extent to which security-related
SATD complements the output produced by SATs and helps bridge some of their
well-known limitations. METHOD: We followed a mixed-methods approach consisting
of (i) the analysis of a SATD-annotated vulnerability dataset using three
state-of-the-art SATs and (ii) an online survey with 72 security practitioners.
RESULTS: The combined use of all SATs flagged 114 of the 135 security-related
SATD instances, spanning 24 distinct Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE)
identifiers. A manual mapping of the SATD comments revealed 33 unique CWE types,
6 of which correspond to categories that SATs commonly overlook or struggle to
detect (e.g., race conditions). Survey responses further suggest that developers
frequently pair SAT outputs with SATD insights to better understand the impact
and root causes of security weaknesses and to identify suitable fixes.
IMPLICATIONS: Our findings show that such SATD-encoded information can be a
meaningful complement to SAT-driven security analysis, while helping to overcome
some of SATs' practical shortcomings.
