Title: AgentStepper: Interactive Debugging of Software Development Agents
Authors: Robert Hutter, Michael Pradel
ID: 2602.06593
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.06593

Abstract:
Software development agents powered by large language models (LLMs) have shown
great promise in automating tasks like environment setup, issue solving, and
program repair. Unfortunately, understanding and debugging such agents remain
challenging due to their complex and dynamic nature. Developers must reason
about trajectories of LLM queries, tool calls, and code modifications, but
current techniques reveal little of this intermediate process in a
comprehensible format. The key insight of this paper is that debugging software
development agents shares many similarities with conventional debugging of
software programs, yet requires a higher level of abstraction that raises the
level from low-level implementation details to high-level agent actions. Drawing
on this insight, we introduce AgentStepper, the first interactive debugger for
LLM-based software engineering agents. AgentStepper enables developers to
inspect, control, and interactively manipulate agent trajectories. AgentStepper
represents trajectories as structured conversations among an LLM, the agent
program, and tools. It supports breakpoints, stepwise execution, and live
editing of prompts and tool invocations, while capturing and displaying
intermediate repository-level code changes. Our evaluation applies AgentStepper
to three state-of-the-art software development agents, ExecutionAgent,
SWE-Agent, and RepairAgent, showing that integrating the approach into existing
agents requires minor code changes (39-42 edited lines). Moreover, we report on
a user study with twelve participants, indicating that AgentStepper improves the
ability of participants to interpret trajectories (64% vs. 67% mean performance)
and identify bugs in the agent's implementation (17% vs. 60% success rate),
while reducing perceived workload (e.g., frustration reduced from 5.4/7.0 to
2.4/7.0) compared to conventional tools.
