Title: Evaluating LLMs in the Context of a Functional Programming Course: A Comprehensive Study
Authors: Yihan Zhang, Brigitte Pientka, Xujie Si
ID: 2603.05646
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.05646

Abstract:
Large-Language Models (LLMs) are changing the way learners acquire knowledge
outside the classroom setting. Previous studies have shown that LLMs seem
effective in generating to short and simple questions in introductory CS courses
using high-resource programming languages such as Java or Python. In this paper,
we evaluate the effectiveness of LLMs in the context of a low-resource
programming language -- OCaml, in an educational setting. In particular, we
built three benchmarks to comprehensively evaluate 9 state-of-the-art LLMs: 1)
$λ$CodeGen (a benchmark containing natural-language homework programming
problems); 2) $λ$Repair (a benchmark containing programs with syntax, type, and
logical errors drawn from actual student submissions); 3) $λ$Explain (a
benchmark containing natural language questions regarding theoretical
programming concepts). We grade each LLMs responses with respect to correctness
using the OCaml compiler and an autograder. And our evaluation goes beyond
common evaluation methodology by using manual grading to assess the quality of
the responses. Our study shows that the top three LLMs are effective on all
tasks within a typical functional programming course, although they solve much
fewer homework problems in the low-resource setting compared to their success on
introductory programming problems in Python and Java. The strength of LLMs lies
in correcting syntax and type errors as well as generating answers to basic
conceptual questions. While LLMs may not yet match dedicated language-specific
tools in some areas, their convenience as a one-stop tool for multiple
programming languages can outweigh the benefits of more specialized systems. We
hope our benchmarks can serve multiple purposes: to assess the evolving
capabilities of LLMs, to help instructors raise awareness among students about
the limitations of LLM-generated solutions, and to inform programming language
researchers about opportunities to integrate domain-specific reasoning into LLMs
and develop more powerful code synthesis and repair tools for low-resource
languages.
