Title: Learning Next Action Predictors from Human-Computer Interaction
Authors: Omar Shaikh, Valentin Teutschbein, Kanishk Gandhi, Yikun Chi, Nick Haber et al.
ID: 2603.05923
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.05923

Abstract:
Truly proactive AI systems must anticipate what we will do next. This foresight
demands far richer information than the sparse signals we type into our prompts
-- it demands reasoning over the entire context of what we see and do. We
formalize this as next action prediction (NAP): given a sequence of a user's
multimodal interactions with a computer (screenshots, clicks, sensor data),
predict that user's next action. Progress on this task requires both new data
and modeling approaches. To scale data, we annotate longitudinal, naturalistic
computer use with vision-language models. We release an open-source pipeline for
performing this labeling on private infrastructure, and label over 360K actions
across one month of continuous phone usage from 20 users, amounting to 1,800
hours of screen time. We then introduce LongNAP, a user model that combines
parametric and in-context learning to reason over long interaction histories.
LongNAP is trained via policy gradient methods to generate user-specific
reasoning traces given some context; retrieve relevant traces from a library of
past traces; and then apply retrieved traces in-context to predict future
actions. Using an LLM-as-judge evaluation metric (0-1 similarity to ground
truth), LongNAP significantly outperforms supervised finetuning and prompted
baselines on held-out data (by 79% and 39% respectively). Additionally, LongNAP
generalizes to held out users when trained across individuals. The space of next
actions a user might take at any moment is unbounded, spanning thousands of
possible outcomes. Despite this, 17.1% of LongNAP's predicted trajectories are
well-aligned with what a user does next (LLM-judge score $\geq$ 0.5). This rises
to 26% when we filter to highly confident predictions. In sum, we argue that
learning from the full context of user behavior to anticipate user needs is now
a viable task with substantial opportunity.
