Title: Human-AI Synergy in Agentic Code Review
Authors: Suzhen Zhong, Shayan Noei, Ying Zou, Bram Adams
ID: 2603.15911
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.15911

Abstract:
Code review is a critical software engineering practice where developers review
code changes before integration to ensure code quality, detect defects, and
improve maintainability. In recent years, AI agents that can understand code
context, plan review actions, and interact with development environments have
been increasingly integrated into the code review process. However, there is
limited empirical evidence to compare the effectiveness of AI agents and human
reviewers in collaborative workflows. To address this gap, we conduct a
large-scale empirical analysis of 278,790 code review conversations across 300
open-source GitHub projects. In our study, we aim to compare the feedback
differences provided by human reviewers and AI agents. We investigate human-AI
collaboration patterns in review conversations to understand how interaction
shapes review outcomes. Moreover, we analyze the adoption of code suggestions
provided by human reviewers and AI agents into the codebase and how adopted
suggestions change code quality. We find that human reviewers provide additional
feedback than AI agents, including understanding, testing, and knowledge
transfer. Human reviewers exchange 11.8% more rounds when reviewing AI-generated
code than human-written code. Moreover, code suggestions made by AI agents are
adopted into the codebase at a significantly lower rate than suggestions
proposed by human reviewers. Over half of unadopted suggestions from AI agents
are either incorrect or addressed through alternative fixes by developers. When
adopted, suggestions provided by AI agents produce significantly larger
increases in code complexity and code size than suggestions provided by human
reviewers. Our findings suggest that while AI agents can scale defect screening,
human oversight remains critical for ensuring suggestion quality and providing
contextual feedback that AI agents lack.
