Title: Inflation, unemployment, and labour force. Phillips curves and long-term projections for Austria
Authors: Ivan Kitov, Oleg Kitov
ID: 1310.1786
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1310.1786

We model the rate of inflation and unemployment in Austria since the early 1960s
within the Phillips/Fisher framework. The change in labour force is the driving
force representing economic activity in the Phillips curve. For Austria, this
macroeconomic variable was first tested as a predictor of inflation and
unemployment in 2005 with the involved time series ended in 2003. Here we extend
all series by nine new readings available since 2003 and re-estimate the
previously estimated relationships between inflation, unemployment, and labour
force. As before, a structural break is allowed in these relationships, which is
related to numerous changes in definitions in the 1980s. The break year is
estimated together with other model parameters by the Boundary Element Method
with the LSQ fitting between observed and predicted integral curves. The
precision of inflation prediction, as described by the root-mean-square
(forecasting) error is by 20% to 70% better than that estimated by AR(1) model.
The estimates of model forecasting error are available for those time series
where the change in labour force leads by one (the GDP deflator) or two (CPI)
years. For the whole period between 1965 and 2012 as well as for the intervals
before and after the structural break (1986 for all inflation models)
separately, our model is superior to the naïve forecasting, which in turn, is
not worse than any other forecasting model. The level of statistical reliability
and the predictive power of the link between inflation and labour force imply
that the National Bank of Austria does not control inflation and unemployment
beyond revisions to definitions. The labour force projection provided by
Statistic Austria allows foreseeing inflation at a forty-year horizon: the rate
of CPI inflation will hover around 1.3% and the GDP deflator will likely sink
below zero between 2018 and 2034.
