Title: Does Banque de France control inflation and unemployment?
Authors: Ivan Kitov, Oleg Kitov
ID: 1311.1097
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1311.1097

We re-estimate statistical properties and predictive power of a set of Phillips
curves, which are expressed as linear and lagged relationships between the rates
of inflation, unemployment, and change in labour force. For France, several
relationships were estimated eight years ago. The change rate of labour force
was used as a driving force of inflation and unemployment within the Phillips
curve framework. The set of nested models starts with a simplistic version
without autoregressive terms and one lagged term of explanatory variable. The
lag is determined empirically together with all coefficients. The model is
estimated using the Boundary Element Method (BEM) with the least squares method
applied to the integral solutions of the differential equations. All models
include one structural break might be associated with revisions to definitions
and measurement procedures in the 1980s and 1990s as well as with the change in
monetary policy in 1994-1995. For the GDP deflator, our original model provided
a root mean squared forecast error (RMSFE) of 1.0% per year at a four-year
horizon for the period between 1971 and 2004. The rate of CPI inflation is
predicted with RMSFE=1.5% per year. For the naive (no change) forecast, RMSFE at
the same time horizon is 2.95% and 3.3% per year, respectively. Our model
outperforms the naive one by a factor of 2 to 3. The relationships for inflation
were successfully tested for cointegration. We have formally estimated several
vector error correction (VEC) models for two measures of inflation. At a four
year horizon, the estimated VECMs provide significant statistical improvements
on the results obtained by the BEM: RMSFE=0.8% per year for the GDP deflator and
~1.2% per year for CPI. For a two year horizon, the VECMs improve RMSFEs by a
factor of 2, with the smallest RMSFE=0.5% per year for the GDP deflator.
