Title: The secret vice: masturbation in Victorian fiction and medical culture
Authors: Diane Mason
ID: openalex.W1548299629
URL: http://uilis.unsyiah.ac.id/opentheses/items/show/25090

This dissertation considers the representation of masturbation in medical and
fictional texts between the mid-Nineteenth Century and the first decade of the
Twentieth. Discussion of masturbation in this period has been dominated by the
writings of medical historians such as Paula Bennett and Vernon A. Rosario II,
and Jean Stengers and Anne van Neck, who make but passing reference to the wider
cultural manifestations of the practice. This dissertation goes beyond the
pioneering work of these writers in order to address how the symptomatologies
and prognoses associated with the medicalised practice of masturbation are
manifested in the fiction of the period. The dissertation addresses both
clinical and popular medical writings on the subject, and makes reference to
ephemeral as well as canonical fictions. Among the issues which are discussed
during the six chapters of the dissertation are the distinctive issues of male
and female masturbation, the association of masturbation with male homosexuality
and lesbianism, the representation of masturbation in pornography and the
symptomalogical congruence between masturbation and other pathological
disorders. The latter has implications for the boundary between diagnosis and
misdiagnosis, and the dissertation addresses this particular point through a
reading of two fictional characters who have, effectively, been misdiagnosed by
the assumptions of twentieth-century criticism. VI The Introduction reviews the
critical issues raised by masturbation. Chapter One examines the symptoms and
medical literature of male masturbation in the Victorian period, paying
particular attention to the manner in which such writings play upon the
anxieties of the male subject aspiring to a conventional, conjugal relationship,
and to the symptoms associated with the habitual onanist. These symptoms, and
their implications, are discussed with reference to Latimer, the debilitated
narrator of George Eliot's The Lifted Veil (1859). Chapter Two complements the
first chapter by way of an investigation of the largely overlooked discourse on
female masturbation. Reference is made to a wide range of clinical and popular
medical works, and the symptomatology of the female onanist is clarified with
reference to Bram Stoker's Dracula (1897) and an anonymous pornographic novella,
'Lady Pockingham', first published in 1879. Chapter Three expands on one of the
issues raised in its immediate predecessor, namely the congruence between the
symptoms of masturbation and those of other disorders. Making particular
reference to the fictional representation of consumption, the chapter considers
the erotic implications of IS. Le Fanu's novella 'Carmilla' (1871), and notes
also the connections between masturbation, consumption and female same-sex
desire. Chapter Four continues the theme of homosexual desire by considering the
manner in which the discourse on masturbation impacts upon the representation of
sodomy and male sexual inversion. This chapter makes extensive use of the
anonymous homosexual novella Teleny (1893), and notes in particular how the work
is influenced by clinical medicine. Chapter Five explores the connection between
masturbation and obsessive behaviour, making particular reference to Dickens'
Our Mutual Friend (1865). The central character of the novel, Bradley Headstone,
is further analysed in order to consider the representation of epilepsy, and the
symptomalogical connection between this disorder and masturbation. The final Yll
chapter compares the pathology and symptoms of opium addiction and masturbation.
Chapter Six examines the portrayal of Dorian Gray, alleged to be a masturbator
by some modern critics, but whose condition may more accurately be seen to
conform to that of the opium abuse he is also associated with in Wilde's 1890
novella. The chapter's revisionist response to this assumption is echoed by a
subsequent analysis of John Jasper in Dickens' The Mystery of Edwin Drood
(1870). Nominally an opium smoker, Jasper is a character who also displays the
stigmata of the onanist. The Conclusion recalls the issues examined in the
Dissertation, before considering the persistence of the discourse on
masturbation in the later Twentieth Century, with particular reference to Philip
Roth's Portnoy's Complaint (1969) and Willy Russell's The Wrong Boy (1999).
