Title: Bridging experience, action, and culture in music education
Authors: Heidi Westerlund
ID: openalex.W2914947225
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10138/234870

This dissertation examines two contemporary theories of music education within a
pragmatist frame of reference. By using methods of analysis and synthesis it
shows how Bennett Reimer's and David J. Elliott's philosophies of music
education manifest individualism and thus undermine the actual social context of
music education. Predominantly through the use of John Dewey's philosophical
tools, the work searches for a perspectival and holistic orientation in which
music is understood as an embodied situational experience and learning as a
process in and through social contexts.\n\nThe study illustrates the continuity
between the Cartesian-Kantian self, aesthetics and Reimer's theory. It points
out that the dualistic isolation of the subject from the object, the mind from
the body, and the individual from the social and communal is a shared tendency.
Through its historical perspective, and by making a comparison to the
traditional African conception of the self and its musical manifestations, the
work argues that Reimer's theory is ethnocentric, and hence, narrows rather than
widens the transformative possibilities of music as experience in education. It
also shows how Reimer's notion of aesthetic experience is incompatible with his
use of Dewey's holistic ideas.\n\nElliott's Aristotelian praxis theory of music
education tries to overcome the Cartesian "errors" by abandoning the notion of
aesthetic experience in favour of musical action and emphasising music as
authentic rule-based cultural information. The study analyses how Elliott's
cognitive theory seems to neglect the sensing and feeling body, the student's
perspective, and the actual context of learning and thus the ethics of praxis.
Moreover, this research shows how the aesthetic and performance-oriented
praxialism that Elliott poses as being in opposition can be combined in a
Deweyan music education.\n\nFinally, the work discusses how Dewey's pedagogical
ideas together with his commitment to cultural plurality, can bring forth a more
socially, communally concerned and context-sensitive music education than either
the individualistic theories of Reimer or Elliott do. Themes such as the project
approach, democratic learning community, "oeuvres", and framing musical events
are discussed in the search for holistic view of music education.
