Title: Narrative immediacy and first-person voice in contemporary American novels
Authors: Amy Sandefur
ID: openalex.W2767904520
URL: https://doi.org/10.31390/gradschool_dissertations.584

This study of first-person fictive narration analyzes a selection of
contemporary American novels so as to understand and describe more fully a
literary effect I call immediacy. I employ the term immediacy to define
narrative situations in which little durational gap exists between experience
and narration and in which little ideological and emotional distance is
communicated between the narrating persona and the subject self. The following
chapters provide a close examination of narrative techniques employed by writers
in the creation of immediacy and argues that both the tone of the novels and
their themes of maturation and self-identity are attributable to strategies of
narration. The novelists studied here use these strategies to reflect the
complex, dichotomous nature of self-identity and to re-envision modes of self-
representative writing such as autobiography and Bildungsroman. Each of the
texts considered features a narrator-protagonist who faces and overcomes
oppressive and restrictive circumstances. As in previous scholarship, this work
argues that the act of self-narration is constitutive of a character’s
achievement of self-actualization. More specifically, I argue that the
narrator’s close proximity to experiences, an aspect of fiction often
overlooked, contributes significantly to the impact effected by the narrative
voice. By composing a narration that occurs seemingly in conjunction with
experience, the writers studied here depict the changing process of identity
development rather than a narrator’s reconstruction of it through reflection.
Through the fluidity that results, writers develop protagonists who defy
conventional definitions. Thus the immediacy characterizing the narration of
these works signifies agency achieved by the marginalized protagonists.
Additionally, the flexibility of the form aids novelists in achieving the dual
purposes of portraying an authentic-seeming individual voice and conveying
social commentary. The concluding chapter examines the salience of narrative
immediacy in novels in which a substantial temporal gap exists between narration
and experience. This broadening of the study illustrates that narrator proximity
is indeed worth study, not only for extending the parameters of narrative
theory, but also for enhancing our understanding of the intricate ways in which
narrative voice interacts with theme and cultural context.
