Title: Voices of Midlife Tomboys: A Narrative Study
Authors: Jan Secrist
ID: openalex.W3190086828
URL: https://doi.org/10.22371/05.1996.007

Women's lives have been increasingly researched in the last thirty years,
offering greater understanding of their roles and relationships within our
patriarchal culture. It is now readily understood that adolescence tends to mute
the positive sense of self and authentic voice of young girls in our current
culture, and midlife tends to relax these restrictions, allowing self and voice
to emerge once again. Many women in their middle years rediscover the spirited,
independent, and competent identity left behind when they accepted cultural
restrictions to conform to a world that was not of their own making. In spite of
the increased knowledge about women's lives, however, virtually no studies have
concentrated on the cultural experiences of tomboy women. Tomboys have been
defined as cultural rebels for over six centuries, yet their personal stories
have not been studied to identify their patterns of acceptance or resistance to
social restrictions. The purpose of this study was to gather and analyze
narratives of the historical events and challenges of ten midlife heterosexual
tomboy women in an effort to better understand their life choices. The four
original questions were organized around the specific life events of being
childhood tomboys, navigating adolescence, selecting careers, and experiencing
midlife. This qualitative research method involved a reflective narrative
process which encouraged personal life stories to emerge in three ways: oral
interviews, individual selection of a photograph or creative art piece that
reflected how they felt about having lived their lives as tomboys, and written
description interpreting their representative art. These stories were then woven
into themes in an effort to create a mosaic of their common experiences. The
portraits that emerged from this study supported cultural tomboy traditions of
independence and a refusal to be squelched either physically or mentally. Their
childhoods were free and independent, but adolescence was difficult for some
primarily because they no longer were allowed to roam freely in the male world,
and they did not want to live in the female world. Their competitive strengths
and love of physical expression could not be contained for long, however, and
they regained their strong sense of self in early adulthood. These tomboys
shared a light-hearted and irreverent humor, continued high level of energy in
their midlife years, an enthusiasm for their maverick natures, and a firm
determination to maintain an authentic voice that has been a tomboy trademark
for hundreds of years. It appears the Tomboy
