Title: Rebellion and Reconciliation: Social Psychology, Genre, and the Teen Film 1980-1989
Authors: Christine Karen Reeves Hubbard
ID: openalex.W2267275312
URL: https://digital.library.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metadc279235/

In this dissertation, I bring together film theory, literary criticism,
anthropology and psychology to develop a paradigm for the study of teen films
that can also be effectively applied to other areas of pop culture studies as
well as literary genres. Expanding on Thomas Doherty's discussion of 1950s teen
films and Ian Jarvie's study of films as social criticism, I argue that teen
films are a discrete genre that appeals to adolescents to the exclusion of other
groups. Teen films subvert social mores of the adult world and validate
adolescent subculture by reflecting that subculture's values and viewpoints. The
locus of this subversion is the means by which teenagers, through the teen
films, vicariously experience anxiety-provoking adult subjects such as sexual
experimentation and physical violence, particularly the extreme expressions of
sex and violence that society labels taboo. Through analyzing the rhetoric of
teen lifestyle films, specifically the teen romance and sex farce, I explore how
the films offer teens vicarious experience of many adolescent "firsts." In
addition, I claim that teen films can effectively appropriate other genres while
remaining identifiable as teen films. I discuss hybrid films which combine the
teen film with the science fiction genre, specifically Back to the Future and
Bill and Ted's Excellent Adventure, and the musical genre, specifically Girls
Just Want to Have Fun and Dirty Dancing. In my discussion of the slasher film,
specifically the Halloween. Friday the 13th. and A Nightmare on Elm Street
cycles, I highlight how teen films function as a safe place to explore the
taboo. Finally, I discuss the way in which the teen film genre has evolved in
the 1990s due in part to shifts in social and economic interests. The teen films
of the 1990s include the viewpoints of women, minorities, the handicapped, and
homosexuals and question the materialistic ethos of the 1980s films.
