Title: Portraits of the songwriting process in elementary classrooms
Authors: Sally dhruva Stephenson
ID: openalex.W2245232771
URL: https://doi.org/10.33915/etd.2373

This study uses the qualitative research technique of portraiture to study the
songwriting process in elementary classrooms. In chapter one, the author
provides a theoretical framework for incorporating the arts and music in general
education, and proposes to provide support for incorporating the creative
process of songwriting into the elementary curriculum. Chapter two reviews the
research literature on the educational and therapeutic uses of songwriting, and
published examples of educational applications of songwriting. In chapter three,
the methodology of portraiture is explained and four research settings are
described, one each in Virginia, West Virginia, Tennessee, and Maryland. Two of
the sites involve visiting songwriters-in-residence, and the other two sites
involve regular classroom teachers in educational outreach programs sponsored by
professional organizations (Country Music Hall of Fame and Metropolitan Opera
Guild). In chapter four, the results of the researcher's observations,
interviews, and review of student products are presented as portraits of the
songwriting experiences (one for each site). In the final chapter, the author
reflects and integrates the four portraits and draws conclusions regarding the
four approaches to the songwriting process observed. Inferences from the data
are discussed in sections entitled "Collaboration, Cooperation and Engagement,"
"Voices of the Children," and "Authentic Learning Experiences." The chapter
concludes with reflections on the research with recommendations for further
study. The researcher suggests that there is sufficient justification, outlined
specifically in national and state educational standards, supported by research
literature, and brought to life by the experiences and voices of those in the
field, to incorporate songwriting into the regular elementary curriculum. Also
included are fourteen excerpts from songs written by elementary students,
references, and four appendices: interview questions, summary of songwriting
pedagogy by site, song topics grouped by theme, and National Standards for Arts
Education relating to the songwriting process.
