Title: Socio-Cultural Conception of Albinism and Sexuality Challenges among Persons with Albinism (PWA) in South-West, Nigeria
Authors: AD Ikuomola
ID: openalex.W1515408363
URL: https://doi.org/10.4314/ijah.v4i2.14

The conception of albinism and the plight facing persons with albinism (PWA) in
south-western Nigeria have long been viewed and overemphasised from a biomedical
perspective. However, there is a lack of information on the socio-historical
conception of albinism and the corollary effect on albinos’ sexuality
challenges. This study examines the socio-cultural barriers affecting PWA in the
formation of identity and sexual negotiations and relationships. The study was
purely qualitative in nature, revealing the Yoruba myths, folktales and legends
about albinos as both disabled and divine beings. This was highlighted as having
a significant impact on their sexuality, associations, and relationships with
persons with/out pigmentation defects. Men with albinism (MWA) were discovered
to be more likely to get involved in relationships and possibly getting married
especially if they are from a wealthy home. Similarly a better chance and strong
familial support exist for a first-born son and for an only male child, than the
females with albinism (FWA). This buttresses the patriarchal nature of the
African society which emphasises much preference for the male born. From birth
therefore, gender was narrated as a discriminatory factor. However, identity
formation, association and getting involved in sexual relationships were major
challenges affecting all PWA. For the female PWA the risk of being used for
money making rituals; not knowing a sincere partner; their more fragile nature
and perceived fear of societal objection and hatred in seeing a non-albino with
an albino getting involved were highly traumatising. The study concluded that
the sociocultural conception of albinism and albinos as disabled and spirit
beings should be deconstructed to pave the way for effective expression of
sexual relationships. Key words: Spirit beings, myth, relationships, gender,
patriarchy
