Title: One Pixel, One Interaction, One Game: An Experiment in Minimalist Game Design
Authors: Pier Luca Lanzi, Daniele Loiacono, Alberto Arosio, Dorian Bucur, Davide Caio, Luca Capecchi, Maria Giulietta Cappelletti, Lorenzo Carnaghi, Marco Giuseppe Caruso, Valerio Ceraudo, Luca Contato, Luca Cornaggia, Christian Costanza, Tommaso Grilli, Sumero Lira, Luca Marchetti, Giulia Olivares, Barbara Pagano, Davide Pons, Michele Pirovano, Valentina Tosto
ID: 2207.03827
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.03827

Abstract:
Minimalist game design was introduced a decade ago as a general design principle with a list of key properties for minimalist games: basic controls, simple but aesthetically pleasing visuals, interesting player choices with vast possibility spaces, and sounds that resonate with the design. In this paper, we present an experiment we did to explore minimalism in games using a bottom-up approach. We invited a small group of professional game designers and a larger group of game design students to participate in a seminal experiment on minimalism in game design. We started from the most basic game elements: one pixel and one key which provide the least amount of information we can display and reasonably the most elementary action players can perform. We designed a game that starts with a black pixel and asks players to press a key when the pixel turns white. This minimal game, almost a Skinner box, captures the essential elements of the mechanics of games like "The Impossible Game," which asks players to do nothing more than press a key at the right moment. We presented this game concept to the professional game designers and challenged them to create other games with the least amount of player interaction and displayed information. We did not specify any constraints (as usually done in other contexts) and left them free to express their view of minimalistic game design. We repeated the experiment with 100+ students attending a master-level course on video game design and development at our institution. We then analyzed the creations of the two groups, discussing the idea of minimalistic design that emerges from the submitted game concepts.
