Title: Psychophysical Training of Young People for Homeland Defence Using means of Physical Culture and Sports
Authors: Roman O. Prots, Volodimir Yakovliv, Serhii Medynskyi, Roman Kharchenko, Tetiana Hryb
ID: openalex.W3195670517
URL: https://doi.org/10.18662/brain/12.3/225

The research prominence lies in an increasing interest of the state in patriotic
education and physical training of young people for homeland defenсe. There is
an urgent today to reconstruct the ethnic model of patriotic education and its
component, in particular military-and-patriotic education, identify the means of
physical culture and sports (physical exercise; natural, artificial and hygienic
factors) and justify their use under reforms in education following the needs
and demands of the individual and the society in Ukraine. The research aims to
theoretically justify and experimentally verify the effectiveness of military-
and-patriotic education of young people using physical culture and sports based
on ethnopedagogy, following neuropedagogical criteria of their psychophysical
readiness for homeland defenсe. The authors of the research offer to introduce
the specialized course on martial arts of Ukraine, which refers to the worldview
and mindset of Ukrainians underlying the Ukrainian military (combat) culture, as
well as strengthening and enhancement of neuropsychological properties and
symptom complexes of character. The control group pupils (25) were taught based
on the traditional system (they acquired and improved their knowledge, abilities
and skills in preliminary military training). The experimental group pupils (25)
purposefully studied the specialized course on the martial arts of Ukraine. Such
methods as surveys, questionnaires, tests, interviews and observations were used
to conduct neuropsychological diagnostics of young people’s readiness for
homeland defenсe. In EG, the number of the respondents with a high level of
psychophysical readiness for homeland defenсe has increased by 10.3%; the number
of the respondents with an average level of psychophysical readiness for
homeland defenсe has increased only by 2.2%; the number of the respondents with
a low level of psychophysical readiness for homeland defenсe has decreased by
12.5%. Modern military-and-patriotic education of young people can be considered
effective if the pedagogical model of military-and patriotic education using
physical culture and sports and taking into account neuropsychological and
neuropedagogical factors is integrated into the modern system of national
education.
