Title: Bee Representations in Human Art and Culture through the Ages
Authors: Kit Prendergast, Jair E. García, Scarlett R. Howard, Zong‐Xin Ren, Stuart J. McFarlane
ID: openalex.W4200469700
URL: https://doi.org/10.1163/22134913-bja10031

Abstract The field of bioaesthetics seeks to understand how modern humans may
have first developed art appreciation and is informed by considering a broad
range of fields including painting, sculpture, music and the built environment.
In recent times there has been a diverse range of art and communication media
representing bees, and such work is often linked to growing concerns about
potential bee declines due to a variety of factors including natural habitat
fragmentation, climate change, and pesticide use in agriculture. We take a broad
view of human art representations of bees to ask if the current interest in
artistic representations of bees is evidenced throughout history, and in
different regions of the world prior to globalisation. We observe from the
earliest records of human representations in cave art over 8,000 years old
through to ancient Egyptian carvings of bees and hieroglyphics, that humans have
had a long-term relationship with bees especially due to the benefits of honey,
wax, and crop pollination. The relationship between humans and bees frequently
links to religious and spiritual representations in different parts of the world
from Australia to Europe, South America and Asia. Art mediums have frequently
included the visual and musical, thus showing evidence of being deeply rooted in
how different people around the world perceive and relate to bees in nature
through creative practice. In modern times, artistic representations extend to
installation arts, mixed-media, and the moving image. Through the examination of
the diverse inclusion of bees in human culture and art, we show that there are
links between the functional benefits of associating with bees, including
sourcing sweet-tasting nutritious food that could have acted, we suggest, to
condition positive responses in the brain, leading to the development of an
aesthetic appreciation of work representing bees.
