Title: When Authenticity Goes Missing: How Monocultural Children’s Literature Is Silencing the Voices and Contributing to Invisibility of Children from Minority Backgrounds
Authors: Helen Adam
ID: openalex.W3120711178
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci11010032

The importance of recognising, valuing and respecting a child’s family, culture,
language and values is central to socially just education and is increasingly
articulated in educational policy worldwide. Inclusive children’s literature can
support children’s human rights and contribute to equitable and socially just
outcomes for all children. However, evidence suggests many educational settings
provide monocultural book collections which are counterproductive to principles
of diversity and social justice. Further, that educators’ understandings and
beliefs about diversity can contribute to inequitable provision and use of
diverse books and to inequitable outcomes of book sharing for many children.
This paper reports on a larger study investigating factors and relationships
influencing the use of children’s literature to support principles of cultural
diversity in the kindergarten rooms of long day care centres. The study was
conducted within an ontological perspective of constructivism and an
epistemological perspective of interpretivism informed by sociocultural theory.
A mixed methods approach was adopted, and convergent design was employed
interpret significant relationships and their meanings. Twenty-four educators
and 110 children from four long day care centres in Western Australia
participated. Data were collected through semi-structured interviews, video-
based observations, field notes, document analysis and a book audit. This study
firstly identified that current book collections in kindergarten rooms of long
day care centres promote mono-cultural viewpoints and ‘othering’ of minority
groups through limited access to books portraying inclusive and authentic
cultural diversity. Secondly, that educators had limited understandings of the
role of literature in acknowledging and valuing diversity and rarely used it to
promote principles of diversity, resulting in a practice of “othering” those
from minority group backgrounds. The key challenges which emerged from the study
concerned beliefs, understanding and confidence of educators about diversity and
inclusion, and the impact of these on their approaches to promoting principles
of diversity through the use of children’s books. This research contributes to
discussion on the value of children’s literature in achieving international
principles of diversity. These findings have important social justice
implications. The outcomes of this study have implications for educators, policy
makers, early childhood organisations and those providing higher education and
training for early childhood educators.
