Title: Role of Physical Education in Societal Growth
Authors: Madhumita Batul
ID: openalex.W3154071762
URL: https://doi.org/10.48175/ijarsct-1001

Physical Education is an old age concept, considered to be the first form of
communication and was used by the primitive men for survival. With the
advancement of time physical education has become a full fledge professional and
an integral part of education of human beings. In the 21st century physical
education contribution towards the society and national building is very
significant and praise worth. Physical education uses physical activity, sports
and game and exercise as a medium to not only nurture the social values and
attributes in the youth but also play an important role in preventing lifestyle
disease of 21st century. Physical activity and sports helps in imparting
leadership, comradeship and good human values in the children and promotes
health and wellness of the citizens. National harmony among the citizens and
international peace can be achieved through sports and physical activities.
Therefore it can be established that physical education plays a pivotal role in
society and nation building. This review provides an overview of the existing
literature on school-aged children’s and youth’s (i.e. 6- to 18-year-olds)
personal and social development within the context of physical education and
sports. A total of 4359 non-duplicate articles were retrieved from six
databases. After the title, abstract and full text screening, 88 articles met
the inclusion criteria and were included for further analysis. The 88 studies
used several study designs, methods and instruments to investigate a variety of
concepts related to personal and social development. Concepts were grouped into
the following 11 themes: work ethic; control and management; goal-setting;
decision-making; problem-solving; responsibility; leadership; cooperation;
meeting people and making friends; communication; and prosocial behaviour. The
main findings for each of the 11 themes are reported, and limitations and
implications are provided to guide researchers and practitioners in their future
work.
