Title: Exclusive Breastfeeding Duration, Breastfeeding Continuation and Associated Factors Among Turkish Mothers: A Baby-friendly Hospital Study From Konya, Turkey
Authors: Esma Keleş
ID: openalex.W3193748065
URL: http://doi.org/10.4274/jcp.2021.0025

Identifying and understanding the factors on exclusive breastfeeding duration
and continuation at the community level in a clinician's setting is vital for
designing interventions to improve. The objective of this study was to evaluate
the factors associated with exclusive breastfeeding time and total continued
breastfeeding period among mothers in the middle region of Turkey. Materials and
Methods: A questionnaire form including; information about women's and
children's socio-demographic characteristics and breastfeeding habits was used.
Results: A total of 1041 mothers were included in the study. Exclusive
breastfeeding time and total continued breastfeeding period were found as
5.451.98/month and 17.568.17/month, respectively. On the other hand, most of the
mothers (74.9%) exclusively breastfed their children more than 6 months while
only 35% of mothers continued breastfeeding over 24 months. Current study showed
that types of first prelacteal feeds, maternity age (30-40 years of age),
socioeconomic status, single child birth and doctor/nurse as the source of
knowledge about benefits of breastfeeding were strongly associated with the
exclusive breastfeeding time of 6 months. In addition, young mothers (20-30
years of age), primiparous, breast milk as the first prelacteal feed, lower
educational level, low socioeconomic status, nuclear type of family status and
doctor/nurse as the source of knowledge about benefits of breastfeeding were
found to be strongly associated with total continued breastfeeding period of 24
months. Conclusions: Certain factors can be associated with exclusive
breastfeeding duration and breastfeeding continuation. So, community-based
proposals should be prepared by working on the determined factors to improve
breastfeeding duration.
