Title: A Qualitative Study of Adolescent Body Identity (High School Girls in Boroujerd)
Authors: Sara Khazaie, Mohammadesmaei Riahi
ID: openalex.W3042311152
URL: https://doaj.org/article/ee070ee9e9814dccb39f1b1f34f652c4

Adolescence is the starting point for identification. In addition to the rapid
changes in this period and the acquisition of identity, adolescence is one of
the most important periods of life in which a person could have more problems
with the mental image of his body. During this period, attempts to gain identity
and identity formation may be affected by hormonal, biological, and physical
changes. Physical changes may occur if placed in a ‘body-centered’ text and
social context during adolescence increasing the gap between what exists and
what will be, and could create a sense of self-loathing, dissatisfaction, and a
negative image of one’s body in adolescence. Materials and Methods The present
study was a qualitative study of the body identity of adolescent girls under the
influence of their body image, experiences, and physical events in Boroujerd
County, Lorestan Province, Iran. Data from this study were collected through
semi-structured interviews and the grounded theory method was used to analyze
the data. Using theoretical and purposeful sampling methods, 30 high school
girls were interviewed and finally, the collected data were coded and analyzed
in the form of nine axial categories and one core category. Discussion of
Results and Conclusions Constructing the body identity of adolescent girls
through the formation of their mental image of their bodies as a core category
has been subject to certain conditions. These conditions are classified into
three categories: causal, contextual, and interventionist. Causal conditions
include gender stereotypes and comparing one's body with others. At the same
time, maturity acts as a background condition, the Internet as the medium and
the ideal body (slimming) acts as an interfering condition. Also, an adolescent
girl’s body contrasts between the real body and the ideal body. She makes
certain interactions and adopts certain strategies. These interactions and
strategies can be categorized in the form of body monitoring and handling of
irregular eating patterns (such as strict diets, vegetarianism, the use of diet
pills and powders, etc.). Adolescent girls, under their specific physical
conditions during puberty, gender stereotypes, and the presentation of physical
ideal standards through the Internet and beauty norms, feel a great gap between
what they see in their bodies now and what they imagine. They need to engage in
strategies such as strict diets, regular check-ups, and regular check-ups under
the conditions, factors, and backgrounds that adolescent girls are sensitive to
during their adulthood. They experience rapid changes and feelings. Feelings can
be categorized into several categories including feelings of physical anxiety,
embarrassment, and gender alienation. Thus, during adolescence, efforts to gain
identity and identity formation may be influenced by hormonal, biological, and
physical changes. And these physical changes, if located in a social body-
centered context and the adolescent's confrontation with gender stereotypes, can
create a beautiful, attractive woman for her feminine body to be selected and
prepared for the role of a mother and a wife. Also, the adolescent is confused
by the paradoxical conditions of childhood and adulthood, and the expectations
of the society. In order to get rid of this situation, she seeks the ideal and
acceptable body of the society with the help of virtual network channels (the
Internet). By going back and immersing herself in these channels, she learns
that she has to lose weight, do anything to become more attractive, etc. During
adolescence, dissatisfaction with the physical appearance increases because
physical changes such as the weight gain during puberty contrasts with social
prescriptions and idealism in relation to physical attractiveness. But
adolescent girls, in spite of their relentless efforts to become more beautiful,
find themselves in a great gap and become dissatisfied with their bodies and
feel ashamed and worried.
