Title: The Year of Sad Passions: A Second Letter from Northern Italy
Authors: Federica Facchin
ID: openalex.W3178139091
URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/bjp.12653

A few weeks after the Covid-19 outbreak in 2020, I was kindly invited by the
Editor-in-Chief of the British Journal of Psychotherapy to write a subjective
piece describing the situation in Northern Italy, the hardest hit Italian area
at that time, in which the atmosphere was completely different compared with
other parts of the country (Facchin, 2020; Scott, 2020). I decided to condense
my overwhelming emotions in a cathartic letter, and words came out easily.
Writing this second letter one year later is much more complicated: my
perspective is changed, along with my feelings and concerns, and the regional
specificities are no longer significant. In March 2020, when Italy went into its
first lockdown, the air was filled with a mysterious virus, death, and a variety
of promising new beginnings: ‘We will get through this together’, ‘It will make
us better people’, ‘We will learn to value our time and relationships’. For over
a year now, Covid-19 bulletins have been bringing hundreds of dead into our home
on a daily basis. During the first months of the pandemic, everyone was shocked
by the number of deaths, the highest since World War II. One year later, people
are still dying, but that does not seem to make the news anymore. Where are we
now, with more than three million global deaths due to Covid-19?11 At the time
of writing (9 May 2021). What happened to the ‘everything will be all right’
rainbows, to honouring healthcare heroes with songs and applause, to the so-
called ‘quarantine baking’ that led thousands of Italians to raid supermarkets
searching for yeast and flour? Since the very beginning of the pandemic, the
containment measures imposed by the Italian Government – like governments around
the world – involved spending a huge part of our lives online, including work.
During homeworking, we got used to videoconferencing platforms, which became our
window on the world. For a few months, the situation was under control, and
there were indeed some advantages, but then we found ourselves trapped in our
apartment with endless work hours, suffering from the consequences of an
excessive proximity to our partner and children, or vulnerable to a sense of
isolation if alone. For many people, these working conditions – which were
supposed to be smart – turned out to be dumb and associated with a new form of
exhaustion that became well known as Zoom fatigue (Wiederhold, 2020).
Psychotherapists are exhausted too. During supervision, R. – a young
psychologist who has been training to become a psychotherapist – recounts her
difficulties with patients, especially during online sessions. Her partner is
currently working from home, the schools have been closed again, and her child
needs support with remote learning. This young woman, who recently lost two
close ones due to coronavirus, feels completely exhausted, and she is worried
that her fatigue could compromise the quality of her work. She does not want her
patients, as well as her child, to notice how tired she is. Her feeling of
exhaustion challenges the superego injunctions that force her to act like she is
always fine and able to please the others. Supervision reminds her that clinical
practice involves making room for humanity in all its manifestations. At the
same time, our complaints about homeworking may sound quite ridiculous, if one
considers that a Covid-19 redundancy fund procedure has been set up for millions
of workers, and thousands of people lost their job. As reported by the Italian
National Institute of Statistics (ISTAT), 101,000 jobs were lost in December
2020. Of these newly unemployed, 99,000 were women. The unemployment rate rose
to 9.0% and to 29.7% among young people (ISTAT, 2021). The pandemic has been
exacerbating pre-existing socioeconomic inequalities, and women and youth are
bearing the brunt of this crisis, not to mention the global increase in domestic
and gender-based violence (Barbara et al., 2020). The lockdown, although
necessary, enclosed us in a confined space with an unbreathable atmosphere,
especially for children and adolescents. Remote learning has been revealing
dysfunctional family dynamics, as recounted by T., a high school teacher, who
has been stressed by parents’ intrusions during online lessons. On the other
hand, symbiotic mothers celebrated lockdown as a unique chance to enjoy their
children by spending most of the time together, whereas others (like R., the
young psychologist) have been wondering if they were monsters for feeling
overwhelmed by parenting. A huge amount of suffering to deal with, in both
scenarios. In this year of sad passions (fear, rage, resentment), the virus has
been shrinking our horizon of projects, hopes and expectations, and social
uncertainty is turning into a sense of the precariousness of our own being.
Unfortunately, the media – at least in Italy – have been feeding people's
incandescent feelings of insecurity, anger, and exhaustion with clickbait and
misleading articles, especially regarding vaccines. Communication became chaotic
and distressing. Such a perfect breeding ground for conspiracy theories. This
ethical crisis derives from the subjugation of knowledge and information to the
logic of contemporary capitalism. The capitalist discourse is based on the idea
that the market provides solutions to all types of human problems, so that
everything is possible, including a life with zero risks. This deceptive
illusion, in which illness and death are no longer an option, has been
tragically exposed by the pandemic: our existence is not guaranteed. In other
words, everyone – and in every part of the world – now has to confront the
limited nature of humanity. During the pandemic, we had to deal with the
traumatic encounter with the absence of guarantees, and some people tried to
protect themselves from the unbearable anguish deriving from this experience by
becoming Covid deniers. Psychoanalysis is now called on to explore and treat the
long-term consequences of coronavirus (which are still unknown), and to link
them to the contemporary forms of discontent of our civilization. The pandemic
contributed to further highlight the inner connection between the individual and
the sociopolitical register, which should guide psychoanalytic investigation and
clinical practice. The storm is not over and there will be no rainbows at the
end of this devastating pandemic. It is no longer time for songs and dances, it
is time for action. There is much to be done for our wounded humanity. In these
difficult times, the precious tools offered by psychoanalysis may help us to
turn chaos, rage, and fear into an actual transformative experience for the
subject and the community. This is my message of hope. The author would like to
thank the Editor-in-Chief of the British Journal of Psychotherapy, Ann Scott.
The author also thanks her friend Giussy Barbara, who read this letter (which
was not easy to write) and provided suggestions. FEDERICA FACCHIN PhD PsyD is a
psychologist and a licensed psychotherapist with a Lacanian psychoanalytic
orientation. She has been a lecturer at the Freudian Institute of Milan since
2015 and an assistant professor in the Department of Psychology, Catholic
University of the Sacred Heart in Milan since July 2018, where she lectures on
psychodynamics and on the clinical psychology of family relationships. Her paper
‘Psychoses without symptoms and stabilized psychoses: Lacanian suggestions for
treating fuzzy contemporary clinical phenomena’ was published in the BJP in
2016; she is also a peer reviewer for the Journal. Address for correspondence:
[federica.facchin@unicatt.it]
