Title: Netflix Disrupting Dubbing
Authors: Lydia Hayes
ID: openalex.W3145417324
URL: https://doi.org/10.47476/jat.v4i1.2021.148

In 2017, English dubbing entered the mainstream on the initiative of the
subscription video-on-demand service (SVoD) Netflix. Recent English dubs have
taken advantage of the largely convention-free English dubbing industry and, in
2019, dubs outsourced by Netflix to VSI London saw the introduction of
linguistic variation into the dubs of Spanish originals, such as Alta Mar (High
Seas) (Campos and Neira 2019–) and, most notably, Hache (Torregrossa and
Trullols 2019–). In these series, a myriad of British accents is used for
characterisation as an alternative to standardisation strategies that conflate
cultural identities into one, which are prevalent in many consolidated dubbing
industries. In addition to the lack of industry precedents and an argued
associated malleability of viewers, the diegetic quality of dubbed dialogue
seems to have allowed the implausibility of linguistic variation to be accepted
by viewers in an extended “suspension of linguistic disbelief” (Romero-Fresco
2009: 49). In this paper, I explore accents as “unit[s] of cultural
transmission” aka “memes” (Dawkins 1976: 206), and the specific sets of
connotations associated with accents i.e. dialectal memes that are evoked in the
original and dubbed versions of the aforementioned series. Emerging norms in UK
dubs of Spanish originals are then elucidated. Lay summary For over sixty years
now, subtitling has been the default form of translation when bringing foreign
films into English-speaking countries. However, Netflix has recently disrupted
this practice by providing the alternative option of watching many of its non-
English films and series dubbed into English, i.e. the voices of the original
actors are replaced with those of voice actors who perform in English instead
of, say, Spanish. In many countries where dubbing has long been the default
translation practice, such as Spain, the accents used in original versions to
create different character identities are dubbed into one standardised Spanish
accent, which makes it difficult to distinguish between characters’ social
class, among other qualities attached to accent. In the English dubs on Netflix,
however, accents are being used for characterisation. In this article, I analyse
the use of British accents in Netflix’ dubs of the Spanish-original series Hache
and Alta Mar (High Seas), and compare character identities in the original and
dubbed versions, according to the cultural connotations triggered by the
different accents used in each. I apply theories from the Translation Studies
discipline to help understand and support the use of accents in English dubs, as
a valid alternative to standardisation strategies in dubbing. Given a
significant amount of Netflix’ foreign products are in Spanish, the analysis in
this article can be used in future to track changes in English dubs generally
and especially English dubs of Spanish-language originals on Netflix, which
might use different strategies to English dubs of Danish products, or Spanish
products on other streaming platforms, for example.
