Title: The Global Jukebox: A public database of performing arts and culture
Authors: Anna L. Wood, Kathryn R. Kirby, Carol R. Ember, Stella Silbert, Sam Passmore
ID: openalex.W4240032168
URL: https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/4z97j

Standardized cross-cultural databases of the arts are critical to a balanced
scientific understanding of the performing arts, and their role in other domains
of human society. This paper introduces the Global Jukebox as a resource for
comparative and cross-cultural study of the performing arts and culture. The
Global Jukebox adds an extensive and detailed global database of the performing
arts that enlarges our understanding of human cultural diversity. Initially
prototyped by Alan Lomax in the 1980s, its core is the Cantometrics dataset,
encompassing standardized codings on 37 aspects of musical style for 5,776
traditional songs from 1,026 societies. The Cantometrics dataset has been
cleaned and checked for reliability and accuracy, and includes a full coding
guide with audio training examples (https://theglobaljukebox.org/?songsofearth).
Also being released are seven additional datasets coding and describing
instrumentation, conversation, popular music, vowel and consonant placement,
breath management, social factors, and societies. For the first time, all
digitized Global Jukebox data are being made available in open-access,
downloadable format (https://github.com/theglobaljukebox), linked with streaming
audio recordings (theglobaljukebox.org) to the maximum extent allowed while
respecting copyright and the wishes of culture-bearers. The data are cross-
indexed with the Database of Peoples, Languages, and Cultures (D-PLACE) to allow
researchers to test hypotheses about worldwide coevolution of aesthetic patterns
and traditions. As an example, we analyze the global relationship between song
style and societal complexity, showing that they are robustly related, in
contrast to previous critiques claiming that these proposed relationships were
an artifact of autocorrelation (though causal mechanisms remain unresolved).
