Title: Adolescents With Cancer Need Trustworthy Information and Prefer to Receive It From a Human Source Rather Than From the Internet: A Qualitative Study
Authors: Irit Schwartz‐Attias, Haya Raz, Tamar Natanzon-Bracha, Adi Finkelstein, Shulamith Kreitler
ID: openalex.W3217622325
URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.746810

Background: In pediatric cancer, the legal obligation to provide information is
usually toward the parents who are the authorized signatories of the informed
consent form. It is now known that aside from providing information to the
parents, it is also very important to provide information to the children and
adolescents themselves. The question is how the adolescents relate to this. What
information do they already possess and what would they like to know? Would they
wish to hear the truth in all situations and at what stage? What are their
preferred sources of information? Method: A qualitative study that included in-
depth interviews with 19 adolescents with cancer, aged 8.5–18, who were
receiving active treatments and had been diagnosed at least 1 month previously.
The interviews were guided by 15 open-ended questions. Findings: The analysis of
the interviews indicated that adolescents know quite a lot about the course of
their disease and the information they lack is mainly etiological. The
participants reported a lack of knowledge concerning sexuality and a sense of
discomfort talking about it, leaving them with open questions. They all claimed
that it is important to tell the truth: “Even if the truth is difficult, it is
important to tell it.” The participants reported that information can be scary,
so it must be structured and adapted to the age and emotional readiness of the
individual. Most of the participants prefer not to use the internet as an
information resource due to the profusion of stressful and non-adapted
information. Conclusion: Adolescents with cancer need trustworthy information
and prefer to receive it from a human source rather than from the internet. Not
telling the truth can lead them to feel fear and loneliness. The medical staff
must operate in sensitive and creative ways to provide adolescents with access
to information on various subjects, including sexuality, which they are ashamed
to talk about, leaving them with a sense of shame and a lack of knowledge in
this area.
