Title: Digital Textile Design Inspired by Saudi Traditional Symbols of Architecture to Promote the Cultural Identity of Adolescents
Authors: Seetah Al-Mutairi, Eljohra Al-Zahim, Deemah Al-Thumairi, Rahaf Al-Omar, Walaa Al-Wassel
ID: openalex.W3216763126
URL: https://doi.org/10.21608/idj.2021.204931

The idea of the research has emerged, and it focuses on designing modern and
innovative textiles inspired by Saudi traditional symbols with the aim of
attracting adolescents and linking them to their cultures, as well as reviving
these symbols in a way that can cope with the fast developments in cultures and
trends. This is attributed to the cognitive awareness of the importance of
traditional symbols for continuous communication between various generations. In
addition, we are now living in the heyday and revival of the fashion world under
fast developments in this world and the run for coping with it. Therefore, the
research seeks to present a contemporary formulation of Saudi traditional
symbols appropriate to the category of adolescents by using the technology of
digital design as researchers attempt to design textile fabrics by using
decorative units inspired by the symbols of traditional architecture designed
with innovative ways that offer a contemporary formulation of Saudi traditional
symbols with the use of the technologies of digital design. The aim is to
develop awareness of the importance of traditional symbols and employ them in a
creative manner that attracts the adolescents' category and boosts their
affiliation to their cultural identity in order to confirm the continuity of
communication and affiliation in society across generations. Objectives: This
study has been carried out to: explore the youths’ knowledge of traditional
symbols and identify their link to the national identity, form decorative units
inspired by the symbols of traditional architecture, design textiles by using
decorative units based on the sample's trends, and measure the sample's
acceptance of suggested designs. Method: The research adopted the analytical
method with application. It included the analysis and formation of Saudi
traditional symbols, in addition to studying the sample's opinions in respect to
the designs of textiles inspired by Saudi traditional symbols. sample: The
research was applied to a sample of adolescents - males and females – of 15-18
years of age. Tools: Two questionnaires were designed: the first is exploratory
to measure the extent of the sample's acceptance of the idea of designing
fashion and textiles stimulated by Saudi traditional symbols. The sample was
distributed to 250 people of the category of adolescents. The second
questionnaire was for measuring the sample's satisfaction of the designs of
textiles stimulated by traditional symbols. Final designs of textiles were shown
and distributed to 250 adolescents. Results: In this research, the practical
experiment is based on the analysis, structure and repetition of Saudi
traditional symbols, inspired by Saudi architecture with all its details of
doors, windows and archaeological drawings on walls and the symbols of "Al-Qatt
Al-Assiri"( a national costume) to use them in the "digital design program:
Illustrator" to attempt formulating, treating and producing them in different
designs, taking into consideration the design's basics and elements with textile
designs. Two strategics of design structure were used. They were: overlapping
and repetition. Following the distribution of measurement survey of satisfaction
of the target category concerning modern textile designs, the questionnaire
results were analyzed based on 3 main axes: the general look of the design,
creative ideas, and the appropriateness of the design to the target category.
These results are summed up as follows: The possibility of creating numerous
decorative designs that are characterized by modernity and originality through
the analysis of traditional symbols. This is in conformity with the study of
(Al-Eissa, 2019) which emphasizes the richness of Saudi art with the values of
linear rhythm that allows the artist or designer to derive inspiration from it
in order to realize the aesthetic dimension. This also agrees with the study of
(Zalatt, 2013) who asserts that Saudi and Egyptian popular art is rich with
various popular decorations that enrich the design of fashion. There is also an
agreement with the study of (Khessaifan, 2012) who emphasizes the polishing up
of the popular heritage values to introduce its symbols to the front of creative
imagination to make options at hand for creative people that represent their
artistic heritage with the colors of art and literature. Here comes the role of
fashion and textile design in rooting the national identity and maintaining it
through making designs of symbols and traditional decorations. The study results
of (Nabawi, 2018) and (Abdul Azeem, 2015) agree together, who confirm the need
to contribute to the rooting process witnessed in the Arab world, and to protect
popular symbols from disappearance and extinction since the Arab popular
heritage has a positive effective role in consolidating our national identity.
This is in conformity with the main target of this research: to depart from the
familiar design systems in textile designs through overlapping and repetition.
This agrees with the study of (Al-Shaimi and Taha, 2011), which asserts that
preparing decorative designs by depending on repetition types and design basics
leads to obtaining several unprecedented artistic and aesthetic values of these
designs which enrich the field of designing.
