Title: The transformation of education during the corona pandemic: exploring the perspective of the private university students in Bangladesh
Authors: Shamsul Huq Bin Shahriar, Sayed M. Arafat, Nayeema Sultana, Silvia Akter, Md. Mahfuzur Rahman Khan
ID: openalex.W3183614880
URL: https://doi.org/10.1108/aaouj-02-2021-0025

Purpose In 2020, the education system was preliminary halted by the COVID-19
crisis and went through radical improvisation, and online-based distance
learning was the only plausible initiative to continue educational activities
ensuring health guidelines properly. However, in reality, such desperate measure
in case of a lower-middle-income developing nation lacking proper structural
capabilities raised some issues and concerns for both pupils and mentors, and
this study aims to explore the practice of online-based distance learning in
private universities of Bangladesh and the challenges associated with it.
Design/methodology/approach This exploratory research is qualitative in nature.
A total number of 89 undergraduate level university students from different
private universities were divided into two main clusters and interviewed in
depth. Findings The findings of this paper revealed that common developing
country syndromes like improper technological infrastructure development,
limitation to devices or internet accessibility and financial hindrances can
disrupt the harmony of the online learning experience. Also, the lack of tech
literacy has created a huge tension and psychological inertia among both the
teachers and the students. Social implications The coronavirus pandemic event,
with its dreadful influence, is creating immense mental pressures for students
to cope well with the online learning system. Comprehending the underlying
challenges affiliated with online-based distance learning and enabling faculties
or respected personnel with training and development programs to handle
impediments better way, this learning initiative can ensure the best outcomes.
Originality/value The significance of this study lies in comprehending the
feasibility of online-based education regarding lower-middle-income developing
nation context and the realism of such learning process's acceptability
considering its actual effectiveness.
