Title: Caring For, About, and With: Exploring Musical Meaningfulness Among Suzuki Students and Parents
Authors: Karin S. Hendricks, Kathleen M. Einarson, Nancy Mitchell, E.M. Guerriero, P.D. D’Ercole
ID: openalex.W3138955442
URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/feduc.2021.648776

An investigation of the relationships between empathy, music learning, and
shared music values may provide new insights into the ways that musical
meaningfulness and the symbiotic eudaimonic ideal – “flourishing of oneself and
of others” – might be cultivated. We investigated the relationships between
parent perceptions of children’s empathy, parent beliefs and values about music,
and formal Suzuki training over a period of 6 months, to understand ways in
which shared music learning experiences might relate to emotional and musical
connections between parents and children. Participants were parents of 48 Suzuki
students at a structured Suzuki school in the Midwestern United States. We
designed a survey containing an adapted version of the Griffith Empathy Measure
for children with additional questions regarding family demographics and values
regarding music education. Participants completed the survey at the start of the
lesson year, and again 6 months later. Children who persisted in group lessons
throughout the study began with significantly higher empathy scores, compared to
those children who did not participate in group lessons. Children’s initial
empathy scores were significantly positively correlated with parents’ ratings of
the importance of music instruction generally, and of Suzuki instruction
particularly, to their family. A significant but moderate correlation was found
between initial empathy scores and the belief that music would help the child
succeed in other areas. This exploratory study highlights potential
relationships between family music values, children’s empathy, and participation
in group music-making. Our findings are consistent with research demonstrating
that child and parent personalities predict the duration of formal music
training for children. They also support the philosophy of musical
meaningfulness, by suggesting ways in which meaningful connections may be forged
simultaneously between people who care for one another, and between people and
the activities they care about. Our results point to the importance of providing
a variety of music learning activities and structures that reflect the
personality, needs, and interests of children and parents. We offer specific
recommendations for future research to draw further insights and implications
about these relationships.
