Title: Fostering Post-Traumatic Growth in College Classrooms During COVID-19
Authors: Dawn Kutza, Katherine Cornell
ID: openalex.W4285474356
URL: https://doi.org/10.14434/jotlt.v10i1.31381

Almost everything has changed. Aside from losing social connections, academic
support structures, and enrichment opportunities, students face new anxieties
about health, loved ones, and financial security within an uncertain economy.
The sudden loss of control and unanswered questions about the future may leave
many feeling helpless, fearful, angry, or grieving. In the middle of this global
crisis, does classroom learning and traditional curricula suddenly feel less
relevant? With attention on more salient problems and a complexity of emotions
students can’t begin to process, where will the motivation and focus to learn
come from? How can faculty account for this in their teaching? Feeling at a
loss, I was delighted when a former student reached out to discuss these topics.
Through a series of individual personal reflections and conversations, we
explored ways of interpreting this adversity and ultimately co-created meaning
in ways we hope will benefit both students and faculty, whether future learning
is conducted virtually or face-to-face. We found great value in illustrating our
experiences using Tedeschi and Calhoun’s 2004 conceptualization of posttraumatic
growth, which entails positive psychological change experienced as a result of
the struggle to make sense of a highly challenging life circumstance—one such as
COVID-19, which can shatter our worldview, shake us from our ordinary
perceptions, and force us to rebuild ourselves and find deeper meaning.
Specifically, we discussed: What choices do students have in responding to the
current situation and how can faculty support positive growth choices? What
could posttraumatic growth look like during the COVID-19 pandemic? What is
deliberative cognitive exploration, how can it foster growth, and how can
faculty encourage it in their classrooms? What types of growth “outcomes” could
not only give us purpose and meaning in this time, but also build resilience,
and perhaps make us even better than before?
