Title: Academic Performing Traditions of Chilean Guitar Art
Authors: Тетяна Філатова
ID: openalex.W4206058962
URL: https://doi.org/10.31318/2522-4190.2021.131.243205

The relevance of the article lies in the systematization of the phenomena of the
Chilean academic guitar art, the study of the national origins of the performing
school, its principles, achievements, transcultural processes and their mutual
influences, which led to the popularization of the instrument on the Latin
American continent. The purpose of the article is to create an overview panorama
of the development of the academic traditions of Chilean guitar performance, to
identify trends in the formation and genealogy of successive ties between
generations of soloists. The methodology includes methods of historical,
systemic, as well as comparative analysis (for contextual consideration of the
creative activities of famous performers, the formation of a national guitar
school, the detection of successive ties between different generations of
musicians, the study of the influence of the Spanish academic tradition, Latin
American everyday practice of playing and the specifics of playing music on
ancient guitar-like instruments of the Baroque era). Results and conclusions.
The cultural and historical panorama of the formation and development of the
Chilean academic guitar school of the 20th— early 21st centuries is
investigated. The principles and main vectors of the pedagogical activity of its
key representatives — Liliana Perez Corey, Luis Lopez, Oscar Ohlsen are
characterized. A “genealogical tree” of creative contacts and successive ties
between guitarists of different generations has been built. It is concluded that
the academic traditions of the Chilean guitar music of the 20th century were
formed in the general direction of the development of transcultural phenomena.
The performing discourse developed in a complementary way: under the influence
of the most famous Spanish classical guitar school that dominates the world (F.
Tarrega, A. Segovia, E. Pujol); in the conditions of indirect interaction with
the Latin American everyday practice of playing (Argentinean, Uruguayan,
Chilean) and the experience of playing music on ancient authentic European
instruments (lute, vihuela, baroque guitar). It is noted that as a result of the
intensification of creative exchange in the institutional, concert, and festival
spheres, at the end of the twentieth century, a representative generation of
virtuosos and teachers of classical guitar arose in Chilean culture. Chilean
guitarists, no matter in which of the spheres their personal interests were
fixed — European old, classical-romantic, modern music or Latin American
popular, folklore tradition — put forward the creativity of their compatriots
and contemporaries to the leading positions. The appearance of a large number of
albums of Chilean guitar music performed by J. A. Escobar, J. Contreras, M.
Valdebenito, J. A. Sanchez, L. Orlandini, E. Espinoza, E. Salazar, D. Castro is
evidence of close and effective cooperation between virtuosos and domestic
composers.
