Title: Beyond the Normative Family Meal Promotion: A Narrative Review of Qualitative Results about Ordinary Domestic Commensality
Authors: Fairley Le Moal, Maxime Michaud, Carol Hartwick-Pflaum, Georgia Middleton, Isabelle Mallon
ID: openalex.W3137496099
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18063186

There exists a normative representation of family meals in contemporary Western
societies which is promoted as imperative through public health programs, larger
discourses and by some studies in the nutritional and public health research
fields. Family meals, also called domestic commensality, are represented as
convivial events and are associated with positive health and wellbeing outcomes
but there is minimal evidence to show they are beneficial for family members and
it is not known which aspect of the family meal could be responsible for these
alleged benefits. This normative family meal image is based on a representation
of the family as a peaceful unit exempt from external constraints. This
narrative literature review of qualitative studies of family meals seeks to put
forward the underlying premises of this representation and compare it with
reports about actual practices. The results emphasize that eating together is
still practiced and remains valued by family members, which is in contrast to
discourses lamenting the decline of the family meal. However, the valorisation
and recurrence of family meals depends on class, gender and cultural positions.
There is a gap between the norm of healthy or convivial and achievable family
meals, which can reinforce the so-called “mental load” and “emotion work” of
those in charge of feeding the family and heighten inequalities within the
household. In fact, there are many challenges to family meals which originate
from external constraints or are inherent aspects of family life. The results
from this review suggest that we should focus on family meals by taking into
account the food work surrounding it and focussing on the interactional aspects
of family meals. Ethnographic methods allow the researcher to observe the
diversities and complexities of commensality as well as family dynamics and, in
doing so, could provide more realistic representations of eating within the
family.
