Title: Spousal Dementia Grief: A Research Report from the Two-Track Model of Dementia Grief Project
Authors: Alexander Manevich, Simon Shimshon Rubin, Rachel Ben‐Hayun, Judith Aharon‐Peretz, Michael B. Katz
ID: openalex.W3138862257
URL: https://doi.org/10.21926/obm.geriatr.2101160

Caregiving for a loved one suffering from cognitive decline involves coping with
many challenges and losses. This experience increases the risk of worsening the
physical and mental health of the caregiver and has been the subject of a
substantial number of studies focusing on the stress and burden of the primary
caretaker. Theory and research on the &lt;em&gt;grief&lt;/em&gt; reactions
experienced by the family members, however, continues to lag in terms of the
attention given to the behavioral and psychological burden of caregivers. This
study aimed for a deeper understanding of the emotional processes in an
individual involved in caring and caregiving for a spouse suffering from
cognitive decline, through the prism of the &lt;em&gt;Two-Track Model of
Dementia Grief (TTM-DG).&lt;/em&gt; The TTM-DG emphasizes the continuous
emotional attachment to the loved one suffering from cognitive decline (Track
II), along with a medico-psychiatric perspective associated with stress, trauma,
and changes in life (Track I). In this research project, we examined the degree
to which spouses of cognitively impaired, deceased, and healthy partners showed
differences and perceptible patterns considering the elements associated with
the model and their interrelationship. These elements include behavioral
characteristics of the clinical patients suffering from cognitive decline,
objective circumstances of the caregiving situation, personality measures of
attachment of the caring spouse, and a range of measures assessing psychological
well-being and spousal relationship. The current study is a part of a larger
ongoing project in Israel to address loss and grief among caregiving family
members whose loved ones suffer from cognitive decline. The findings reported in
the current paper are based on data derived from self-report questionnaires
(i.e., socio-demographic variables, problematic behaviors in patients, objective
burden, social support, physical health status, attachment patterns, depression,
dementia grief, and relationship satisfaction). Participants in the sample size
of 49 came from three groups: (a) spouses of patients suffering from cognitive
decline, (b) widowers of deceased dementia sufferers, (c) and a control group of
similarly aged participants whose spouses have no cognitive or functional
impairment. Examination of the research hypotheses was done by running
correlations and one/two-way analyses of variance (ANOVA). Behavioral disorders
in the affected spouse correlated positively with the objective burden of the
caring/caregiving spouse and with outcome variables. That is, biopsychosocial
functioning (Track I) and the ongoing attachment bond with the ill spouse (Track
II); objective burden correlated positively with depression and dementia grief,
but not with relationship satisfaction; poor caregiver's physical health was
associated positively with depression and dementia grief, but not with
relationship satisfaction; social support correlated positively with low levels
of depression and dementia grief, as well as to the higher degree of
relationship satisfaction; insecure attachment was found to correlate positively
with depression and dementia grief, but not with relationship satisfaction.
Spouses of cognitively impaired patients reported more difficulties in outcome
variables compared to the control group; widowers of deceased dementia sufferers
reported higher levels of dementia grief and depression than the control group.
In terms of outcome measures, there was no difference between widowers and
spouses of cognitively impaired patients. Among the control group participants,
there was no difference between secure and insecure attachment on outcome
variables. A significant difference between secure and insecure attachment on
outcome variables was observed among spouses of cognitively impaired patients
and widowers so that insecure participants reported higher levels of distress.
The findings of the present study constitute the initial empirical evidence for
the utility of the TTM-DG and support the transition of the field of loss and
bereavement, which emphasizes the importance of the emotional attachment with
the loved one as one of the primary foci of the process of coping with the loss.
Furthermore, the findings highlight factors that contribute to the health and
emotional resilience (secure attachment style, perceived social support, etc.)
and provide a framework that can assist in the process of clinical assessment
and intervention to improve the quality of life of caregivers whose loved one
suffers from cognitive decline.
