Title: Musicians as “Makers in Society”: A Conceptual Foundation for Contemporary Professional Higher Music Education
Authors: Helena Gaunt, Celia Duffy, Ana Čorić, Isabel R. González Delgado, Linda Messas
ID: openalex.W3191246877
URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.713648

This paper considers the purpose, values and principles underpinning higher
music education (HME) as one of the performing arts in a context of turbulent
global change. Recognising complex challenges and opportunities in this field,
HME is addressed from dual perspectives: educating the next generations of
professional musicians, and higher music institutions' (HMEIs) engagement in
society. The paper has a particular focus on the sector within HME that is
dedicated to intensive practical craft training for performers, composers,
programmers, producers, managers, and teachers. We argue that there is an urgent
need for fresh orientating frameworks through which to navigate HME's
development. We examine concepts such as artistic citizenship, social
responsibility and civic mission increasingly perceived to be relevant to the
sector, and we explore their connexions to concepts of artistic excellence,
imagination and creativity, and musical heritage. We identify apparent
dichotomies of value within contemporary HME, including between intrinsic and
instrumental purpose in the arts, cultural heritage, and new work, artistic
imagination and entrepreneurship, and we argue that creative tensions between
what have hitherto easily been perceived as opposing concepts or competing
priorities need to be embraced. To support our argument we draw on the
particular ethnomusicological concept of "musicking," and we look toward a
partnering of artistic and social values in order to enable HME to respond
dynamically to societal need, and to continue to engage with the depth and
integrity of established musical traditions and their craft. Based on this
discussion we propose a conceptual foundation: the "musician as a maker in
society," in which developing vision as a musician in society, underpinned on
the one hand by immersion in musical artistry and on the other hand sustained
practical experience of connecting and engaging with communities, offers
invaluable preparation for and transition into professional life. We propose
that this idea, connecting societal and artistic vision and practise, is equally
essential for HMEIs as it is for musicians, and sits at the heart of the roles
they evolve within their local communities and wider society.
