Title: Aged and gendered master narratives on entrepreneurship in Finnish higher education
Authors: Päivi Siivonen, Katri Komulainen, Kati Kasanen, Paula Kupiainen
ID: openalex.W3189967489
URL: https://doi.org/10.1108/ijge-01-2021-0010

Purpose The purpose of this paper is to examine the construction of master
narratives related to age, gender and entrepreneurship in the context of
entrepreneurship education (EE) in Finnish higher education (HE). This is
important as master narratives create and limit our understanding of
entrepreneurship. Design/methodology/approach The data comprises 30 student
interviews generated in one multidisciplinary Finnish university. The data were
analyzed using narrative positioning analysis to examine what kinds of master
narratives are (re)constructed in relation to age and entrepreneurship by
Finnish university students and how gender intertwines with age in the
construction of entrepreneurship. Findings Three aged and gendered master
narratives were identified: (1) youthful, masculine, startup/growth
entrepreneurship; (2) middle-aged feminine, expert entrepreneurship and (3)
modest, feminine, senior entrepreneurship. The paper makes visible aged and
gendered master narratives and cultural norms related to entrepreneurship in the
context of EE and HE. Authors argue that the youthful, masculine startup/growth
entrepreneurship is the hegemonic master narrative in the context of EE in
Finnish HE. Femininity is mostly excluded from this master narrative.
Originality/value The paper contributes to critical literature on
entrepreneurship as an aged as well as gendered phenomenon in the context of EE
and HE. So far research on entrepreneurship as an aged and gendered phenomenon
in EE and in the context of HE has been virtually non-existent. Moreover, the
theoretical and methodological focus on master narratives in entrepreneurship
and EE literature is novel. The master narratives identified in the study show
that HE students are not addressed equally in relation to entrepreneurship, but
aged and gendered hierarchies are sustained.
