Title: Factors Associated with Duration of Breastfeeding in Bangladesh: Evidence from Bangladesh Demographic and Health Survey 2014
Authors: Ummay Ayesha, ASMA Mamun, Md. Abu Sayem, Golam Hossain
ID: openalex.W4231477865
URL: https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-48974/v3

Abstract Background: Breastfeeding for optimum duration is one of the most
effective ways to reduce infant morbidity and mortality and confirm expected
growth and development of children. The aim of this study was to find out the
effect of socio-demo­graphic and anthropometric determinants on duration of
breast­feeding among Bangladeshi mothers. Methods: The data was extracted from
the Bangladesh Demographic and Health Survey (BDHS)-2014. A total of 3541
married non–pregnant Bangladeshi mothers in reproductive age who had at least
one child aged 6-36 months were included in this study. Independent sample
t-test and analysis of variance (ANOVA) were used to find the significance
difference in duration of breastfeeding between two and more than two groups
respectively. Multiple linear regression model was utilized to determine the
effect of some quantitative variables on duration of breastfeeding. Results:
This study raveled that the mean and median duration of breastfeeding among
Bangladeshi mothers was 18.91 (95% CI: 18.65-19.17) and 19.00 months
respectively. Independent sample t-test and ANOVA showed that duration of
breastfeeding among Bangladeshi mothers was significantly influenced by (i) ANC
service, (ii) religion, (iii) mode of delivery, (iv) parents’ education, (v)
geographical location and (vi) household wealth quintile. Multiple regression
analysis demonstrated that mothers’ age, mothers’ body mass index, total number
of children and mothers’ age at first birth were important predictors of
duration of breastfeeding. Conclusions: Healthcare providers and decision makers
can consider these findings to make plan for counseling of mothers and family
members to promote optimum duration of breastfeeding practice in first two years
of baby’s life.
