Title: Mentalizing and Epistemic Trust: The Work of Peter Fonagy and Colleagues at the Anna Freud Centre Robbie Duschinsky and Sarah Foster Oxford University Press, 2021. 304 pp. £50.00 (cloth &amp; open access pdf). ISBN: 978‐0‐19887118‐7
Authors: Frank C. P. van der Horst
ID: openalex.W3215925922
URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/jhbs.22163

Although psychoanalysis has laid much of the theoretical foundations of current
day psychotherapy and mental health treatment, Freud's ideas have been
controversial ever since their initial formulation over a century ago. Debates
about their value and applicability in clinical practice have been commonplace
and have led to several ruptures within the psychoanalytic movement. Most
salient in this respect were the “Controversial Discussions” in the 1940s that
led to a tripartite division of the British Psychoanalytical Society (BPAS) in
groups of Kleinians, Anna Freudians, and Independents (Van der Horst & Van der
Veer, 2009). The different theoretical orientations within the BPAS and
psychoanalysis in general caused psychodynamic psychotherapists to emphasize
either ego development, object relations, the “self”, defense mechanisms,
(counter)transference or intrapsychic and unconscious conflicts, depending on
the theoretical stance of the psychotherapist involved. The strength of
psychoanalysis in the past 120 years has been that it has reinvented itself
again and again. In recent times, the development of mentalization-based
treatment (MBT) is such an example. MBT originates in the work of Peter Fonagy
and colleagues with patients struggling with emotion dysregulation, impulsivity
and social dysfunction, three key symptoms of Borderline Personality Disorder,
and was developed from the 1990s onwards. Fonagy's many collaborations with
others have made it impossible to acknowledge everyone involved. He once stated,
tongue in cheek: “Many of the ideas presented are [my colleagues'], but if they
should be well received the author will have no hesitation in taking credit for
them” (cited in Duschinsky & Foster, 2021, p. 3). In their though-provoking book
Mentalizing and Epistemic Trust, Robbie Duschinsky and Sarah Foster set out to
describe the evolution of the work and ideas of Fonagy and colleagues at the
Anna Freud Centre. Duschinsky and Foster attempt to give a “constructive
appraisal” (p. 282) of Fonagy's work on mentalization in relation to earlier
ideas on attachment. It is a quite logical continuation of Duschinsky's work on
the history of attachment research (e.g., Duschinsky, 2020), a field that has
expanded immensely in the last couple of decades. Until Duschinsky came to the
field, scholars had not touched upon this recent part of the history of Bowlby's
attachment theory—a grand theory with an active research tradition—and
developments of the last 30 years had barely been examined. Duschinsky's
contributions mean a great leap forward in the historical description and
analysis of attachment theory. Lack of historical distance is often one of the
major problems faced by contemporary historians, but Duschinsky and Foster are
able to deliver the reflexive stand in their current work which offers an in-
depth and hugely insightful analysis of the cross-fertilization of
psychoanalysis, cognitive-behavioral theory, ecological and systemic approaches,
and attachment thinking in the work of Fonagy. Duschinsky and Foster start their
book with the biographical and contextual background within which Fonagy's ideas
and collaborations emerged. Fonagy was trained in psychoanalysis and built much
of his ideas on the work of his psychoanalytic colleagues, such as Anna Freud
and Melanie Klein. But the most influential work was probably that of John
Bowlby. Just like Bowlby, Fonagy wanted to improve the scientific base of
psychoanalytic work (Van der Horst, 2011). Also, like Bowlby, Fonagy considered
differences in attachment relations to be a result of variations in the
filtering and processing of social information about the availability of
attachment figures. So, MBT has clear roots in psychoanalytic and attachment
thinking. Fonagy's work in turn resulted in the reformulation of central
concepts in attachment theory, such as “sensitive care, the cycle of abuse,
internal working model, security” (p. 64). After setting the stage by sketching
a biographical and intellectual background, Duschinsky and Foster present an
analysis of “18 concepts that integrally organize the contributions of Fonagy
and colleagues” (p. 5). Of course, the concepts of “mentalization” and
“epistemic trust” are most central in their analysis. Mentalization is the
capacity to “conceive of and make available for reconsideration the thoughts and
feelings implicated in motivations and intentions in order to account for and
explain the observable social behavior and present and past perceptual
experience of oneself and others” (p. 77). Epistemic trust is “an individual's
willingness to consider new knowledge from another person as trustworthy,
generalizable, and relevant to the self” (p. 179). Duschinsky and Foster make
clear how these concepts were invented, how they evolved over time, and how they
found their place in MBT as a treatment model in mental health care. For the
reader, it becomes clear how the caregiver's capacity to “observe a child's
mental state” (p. 67) influences attachment relations and promotes exploration
of the mental state of the caregiver by the child, thus developing the child's
capacity for mentalization. The sensitive attunement of the caregiver to the
child's signals do not only lead to secure attachment, but also to epistemic
trust, which means early experiences with a caregiver are of crucial importance,
as Bowlby had suggested. There is an anecdote by one of Fonagy's former
students, Howard Steele (personal communication, October 12, 2007), about Joseph
Sandler, predecessor of Fonagy as Freud Professor at University College
London—who was a member of the Anna Freudians faction in the BPAS. Sandler
confessed that he felt bad that he did not cite Bowlby when writing his
important paper on the background of safety (Sandler, 1960), in which he pushed
forward the theory that ego development depends on the background of safety and
parental availability. Later in life, Sandler acknowledged Bowlby's influence,
but admitted he had not wanted to put it down in writing at the time, afraid of
the association. It simply goes to show that in British psychoanalysis, the work
of Bowlby has long been underappreciated (cf. Van Dijken et al., 1998). But in a
way Sandler paved the way for his successor Fonagy to do what he did not dare:
integrating Bowlby's ideas on attachment and rewriting ideas from psychoanalysis
in that light, ultimately leading to the formulation of MBT, which today is used
very successfully for the treatment of personality disorders (Vogt & Norman,
2019; Volkert et al., 2019). Duschinsky and Foster have done an impressive job
in studying the evolution of central concepts in Fonagy's thinking. Their
“constructive appraisal” informs both science and clinical practice about the
current state of the art in MBT and makes clear how Fonagy's ideas developed
over time. Their attempt “to offer reflections that have been friendly and
constructive, looking to understand the underlying coherence of the theory as
well as potential limitations” and give “suggestions to accompany appraisal” (p.
282), offers the readers of Mentalization and Epistemic Trust the opportunity to
reflect on and mentalize about recent developments in a highly influential
paradigm.
