Title: L’insegnamento dell’italiano a stranieri Alcune coordinate di riferimento per gli anni Venti
Authors: Giuseppe Maugeri
ID: openalex.W3181800646
URL: https://doi.org/10.30687/978-88-6969-523-0

This book develops the theme of teaching Italian abroad, starting from the
awareness of the motivations for foreign students to study the Italian language
and the different methodological procedures in order to teach it.For this
purpose, the book focuses on the problems concerning the training of teachers of
Italian to foreigners and on the many aspects of teaching Italian in order to
propose both a methodological reflection on the edulinguistic project and
educational solutions aimed at improving the quality of the students’
learning.Part 1The first part focuses on edulinguistic teaching vision for the
learning of the Italian language as a foreign language based upon the principles
of the Humanistic Approach.1. Teaching Italian Language Abroad: Institutional
Language Policy and StrategiesThis chapter focuses on the situation of Italian
foreign language teaching in the world. It also describes the linguistic policy
for the promotion of Italian languages abroad adopted by the Italian Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and the results obtained as the number of students involved in
the different geographic areas.2. Teaching Trainer Courses as a Key Factor to
Improve the Quality of Teaching Italian AbroadIn this chapter teaching trainer
courses for Italian language teachers are considered as a part of a strategy to
increase the students’ motivations and the learning process.3. Students as a
Customer vs Students as a PersonLinguistic education and the Humanistic Approach
aim to develop the students’ potential and create an autonomous language
personality. Therefore, in this chapter, we outline a teaching perspective that
considers the student as a person at the centre of teaching and learning Italian
process.Part 2In the second part teaching methodologies to improve the quality
of teaching and learning Italian language to foreigners are described.4.
Effective Cooperative Learning Strategies to Teach Italian as a Foreign
LanguageExamples of cooperative learning are given to illustrate how the
following teaching methodology is possible in teaching Italian language even if
it demands strong research and clear guidance for educators.5. How to Teach
Italian Grammar to ForeignersThis chapter examines the existing research about
using a deductive form of teaching grammar versus using an inductive form of
teaching it.6. Teaching Italian Through Literature, Movies and CartoonsIn this
chapter, different media and sources to teach Italian are examined. Using both
classic and digital tools, students can explore the Italian language and culture
from different points of view, developing a strategy to revisit thinking and to
collaborate with others during the reading of classic texts or reading a
cartoon.7. Humanistic Testing and Assessment for Italian as a Foreign
LanguageFrom a Humanistic point of view, in this chapter, testing and assessment
are considered as potential and relevant instruments to measure the progress and
performance of individual students of Italian language.8. How to Plan and Use an
Environment to Teach Italian to ForeignersThis chapter focuses on learning space
to teach Italian to foreigners. The main aim is to provide practical advice and
support to the teachers of Italian language schools that are going to explore
how to develop and adapt learning spaces to the teaching activities and the
students’ needs.
