Title: ‘Free but not free-free’: teaching creative aspects of dance in physical education teacher education
Authors: Christopher Engdahl, Suzanne Lundvall, Dean Barker
ID: openalex.W4200162588
URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/17408989.2021.2014435

Background There is a global consensus that stimulating and fostering children’s
creativity in education is crucial. Addressing creativity has become an
imperative in educational policies and in school curricula internationally.
School-based physical education (PE), and specifically the teaching area of
dance, has been identified as an important pedagogical setting within which to
develop creativity. Existing studies have suggested, however, that dance is
seldom taught in PE in ways that acknowledge creative aspects of movement
learning. Scholars have claimed that teaching pre-arranged dances with
predetermined movement outcomes dominate dance teaching in PE. Furthermore,
studies have asserted that the overarching regulative principles of PE and PETE
that privilege sport skills and physical exercise hinder creative movement
learning. Still, dance teaching is frequently seen as part of expressive dance
teaching in PE and PETE and is regarded as holding potential in the area of
education for creativity. Little scholarly attention has been given to how
teacher educators approach creative aspects in dance teaching.Purpose This
article aims to create insights into how PETE teacher educators understand and
work with creative aspects of dance in their educational practice.Method and
theory To address our aim, we investigate how teacher educators describe their
teaching of creative aspects of dance. To do this, empirical material was
generated through qualitative interviews with PE teacher educators from each of
the PETE institutions in Sweden. The theoretical concepts of smooth and striated
spaces and experimentation by Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari were used to
guide the analysis of how the PETE educators described their teaching of
creative aspects of dance. Deleuze and Guattari developed a framework that
concerned questions of creativity and newness. Despite this conceptual framework
having not yet been used in dance education in PE and PETE, their writing fits
well when analysing questions of creativity in an educational context.Findings
We identified three major themes relating to creativity in the empirical
material: (a) creative aspects of expressive dance; (b) challenges that teacher
educators face when introducing movement exploration in expressive dance to
their students, and; (c) the teacher educators’ pedagogical work with
students.Discussion The results of this study show that teaching expressive
dance can take teaching in PE and PETE in new directions. The results provide
insights into alternative ways of teaching in these educational settings that
can counter the dominant ways of teaching dance. Results suggest that teacher
educators operate in various striated spaces that are shaped by expectations and
conventions. In such spaces, the educators aim to create momentary passages of
smoothening that open up for experimentation and the development of students’
creativity. The results also suggest that expressive dance in PE and PETE
emphasizes creative movement learning through which students learn to operate
within new and unpredictable situations.
