Title: Examining current teaching practices of the arts in early childhood education
Authors: Alyssa Lynn Hanson
ID: openalex.W4393303838
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.31274/td-20240329-314

Education over the years has focused heavily on language arts and mathematics
rather than other subjects such as the arts. This is true not only for education
at elementary and older grade levels, but it is also becoming more apparent in
early childhood education as well. This is due in part to changes in policy and
requirements for testing in some subjects as well as lack of clear requirements
for subjects related to the arts. Another reason that the arts are not always
focused on within the classroom relates directly to the teachers in early
childhood education. Previous research has pointed to a variety of factors that
can influence how a teacher utilizes and teaches the arts in their classroom.
This is the primary focus of the current study which seeks to add to the limited
available literature on teachers’ experiences and perspectives on arts
education. The current study utilized an online survey to ask early childhood
education teachers in a Midwestern state about their practices, values, and
experiences teaching the arts. Findings showed that some areas of the arts, such
as crafts and three-dimensional arts were not taught as often as other areas.
Limited evidence was found to support a relation between teachers views of
importance of different arts and their engagement of these arts in the
classroom. There is evidence that COVID-19 and teaching at a distance impacted
how often different arts were engaged in. Decreases in engagement was reported
for all arts during distance learning compared to normal operations. Reasons for
these findings may be related to what teachers reported were concerns and
barriers when teaching the arts such as funding, access to materials, time, and
training in these arts. Future research is needed to better understand these
barriers and teaching practices across the population of the U.S. and other ways
that COVID-19 may have impacted teaching the arts.
