Title: “Three Steps Above Heaven? Really? That’s All Tactic!” New Alternative Masculinities Dismantling Dominant Traditional Masculinity’s Strategies
Authors: Roseli Rodrigues de Mello, Lars Bonell-García, Marcos Castro-Sandúa, Esther Oliver-Pérez
ID: openalex.W3170524207
URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.673829

Research on preventive socialization of gender violence has contributed abundant
empirical evidence that attraction to violence is common among adolescents. This
has meant that "bad guys," or those who reflect the Dominant Traditional
Masculinity (DTM) model, are chiefly perceived as appealing, while "good guys"
are perceived as good friends but not desirable. The mainstream media tends to
reproduce this traditional model of affective-sexual relationships, which has
harmful effects on young girls concerning gender and sexuality. However, New
Alternative Masculinity men are challenging this traditional and unsatisfactory
model of affective-sexual relationships. The 2010 Spanish version of the movie
Three Steps above Heaven, a good example of this kind of media product, has
proven to greatly impact communicative acts among adolescents. This article
explores how this influence on adolescents is because the communicative acts
about Hache - the main character in the movie - are full of the language of
desire, and his own communicative acts are full of violence. On the one hand, we
analyze how Three Steps above Heaven employs communicative acts to enhance the
attractiveness of DTM. On the other hand, based on the evidence gathered in a
communicative focus group (CFG) addressed to 15- and 16-year-old female
adolescents, we analyze how New Alternative Masculinity men are demystifying
Hache and the idea of having a "Three Steps Above Heaven" by demonstrating with
the powerful language of desire that men like him employ farce strategies. The
article includes evidence from interventions with adolescents where discussion
of movies like this, with the involvement of New Alternative Masculinity men and
grounded in the language of desire, can transform the perception about the
sexual-affective relationship in the movie, thus counteracting their negative
influence in terms of attraction to violence.
