Title: The Circle of Investment: Connecting the Dots of the Portfolio Management Cycle...
Authors: Ravi Kashyap
ID: 1603.06047
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.06047

We will look at the entire cycle of the investment process relating to all
aspects of, formulating an investment hypothesis, constructing a portfolio based
on that, executing the trades to implement it, on-going risk management,
periodically measuring the performance of the portfolio, and rebalancing the
portfolio either due to an increase in the risk parameters or due to a deviation
from the intended asset allocation. We provide several illustrative analogies
that are meant to intuitively explain the pleasures and the pitfalls that can
arise while managing a portfolio. If we consider the entire investment
management procedure as being akin to connecting the dots of a circle, then the
Circle of Investment can be represented as a dotted circle with many dots
falling approximately on the circumference and with no clue about the exact
location of the centre or the length of the radius. We represent the investment
process as a dotted circle since there is a lot of ambiguity in the various
steps involved. The circle also indicates the repetitive nature of many steps
that are continuously carried out while investing. This work introduces two new
points pertaining to this dotted circle and improves the ability, to understand
how far-off this dotted circle is, from a more well-defined circle and, to
create a well-formed circle. The two innovations we introduce are:   1. The
first, relating to the limitations that apply to any finding in the social
sciences, would be the additional point we introduce that lies near the centre
of the circle. We title this as, 'The Uncertainty Principle of the Social
Sciences'.   2. The second, relating to establishing confidence levels in a
systematic manner for each view we associate with a security or group of
securities as required by the Black-Litterman framework, would be the new point
we present near the circumference of the circle.
