Title: Solving the Equity Risk Premium Puzzle and Inching Towards a Theory of Everything
Authors: Ravi Kashyap
ID: 1604.04872
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1604.04872

The equity risk premium puzzle is that the return on equities has far exceeded
the average return on short-term risk-free debt and cannot be explained by
conventional representative-agent consumption based equilibrium models. We
review a few attempts done over the years to explain this anomaly: 1. Inclusion
of highly unlikely events with low probability (Ugly state along with Good and
Bad), or market crashes / Black Swans. 2. Slow moving habit, or time-varying
subsistence level, added to the basic power utility function. 3. A separation of
the inter-temporal elasticity of substitution and risk aversion, combined with
long run risks which captures time varying economic uncertainty. We explore
whether a fusion of the above approaches supplemented with better methods to
handle the below reservations would provide a more realistic and yet tractable
framework to tackle the various conundrums in the social sciences: 1. Unlimited
ability of individuals to invest as compared to their ability to consume. 2.
Lack of an objective measuring stick of value 3. Unintended consequences due to
the dynamic nature of social systems 4. Relaxation of the transversality
condition to avoid the formation of asset price bubbles 5. How durable is
durable? Accounting for durable goods since nothing lasts forever The world we
live in produces fascinating phenomenon despite (or perhaps, due to) being a
hotchpotch of varying doses of the above elements. The rationale for a unified
theory is that beauty can emerge from chaos since the best test for a stew is
its taste. Many long standing puzzles seem to have been resolved using different
techniques. The various explanations need to stand the test of time before
acceptance; but then unexpected outcomes set in and new puzzles emerge. As real
analysis and limits tell us: We are getting Closer and Closer; Yet it seems we
are still Far Far Away...
