Title: A nutritional strategy to promote gilthead seabream performance under low temperatures
Authors: Rita Teodósio, Cláudia Aragão, Rita Colen, Raquel Carrilho, Jorge Dias, Sofia Engrola
ID: 2111.03565
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.03565

Abstract:
Gilthead seabream (Sparus aurata) is vulnerable to low water temperature, which may occur in the Southern Europe and Mediterranean region during Winter. Fish are poikilothermic animals, so feed intake, digestion, metabolism and ultimately growth are affected by water temperature. This study aimed to evaluate growth performance, feed utilisation, nutrient apparent digestibility, and N losses to the environment in seabream juveniles reared under low temperature (13 degrees Celsius). Three isolipid and isoenergetic diets were formulated: a commercial-like diet (COM) with 44% crude protein and 27.5% fishmeal; and 2 diets with 42% CP (ECO and ECOSup), reduced FM inclusion, and 15% poultry meal. ECOSup diet was supplemented with a mix of feed additives intended to promote fish growth and feed intake. The ECO diets presented lower production costs than the COM diet and included more sustainable ingredients. Seabream juveniles (154.5 g) were randomly assigned to triplicate tanks and fed the diets for 84 days. Fish fed the ECOSup and COM diets attained a similar final body weight. ECOSup fed fish presented significantly higher HSI than COM fed fish, probably due to higher hepatic glycogen reserves. The VSI of ECOSup fed fish were significantly lower compared to COM fed fish, which is a positive achievement from a consumer point of view. Nutrient digestibility was similar in ECOSup and COM diets. Feeding fish with the ECO diets resulted in lower faecal N losses when compared to COM fed fish. Feeding seabream with an eco-friendly diet with a mix of feed additives promoted growth, improved fish nutritional status and minimised N losses to the environment whilst lowering production costs. Nutritional strategies that ultimately promote feed intake and diet utilisation are valuable tools that may help conditioning fish to sustain growth even under adverse conditions.
