Title: Econophysics Beyond General Equilibrium: the Business Cycle Model
Authors: Victor Olkhov
ID: 1804.04721
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.04721

Current business cycle theory is an application of the general equilibrium
theory. This paper presents the business cycle model without using general
equilibrium framework. We treat agents risk assessments as their coordinates x
on economic space and establish distribution of all economic agents by their
risk coordinates. We suggest aggregation of agents and their variables by scales
large to compare with risk scales of single agents and small to compare with
economic domain on economic space. Such model is alike to transition from
kinetic description of multi-particle system to hydrodynamic approximation.
Aggregates of agents extensive variables with risk coordinate x determine macro
variables as functions of x alike to hydrodynamic variables. Economic and
financial transactions between agents define evolution of their variables.
Aggregation of transactions between agents with risk coordinates x and y
determine macro transactions as functions of x and y and define evolution of
macro variables at points x and y. We describe evolution and interactions
between macro transactions by hydrodynamic-like system of economic equations. We
show that business cycles are described as consequence of the system of economic
equations on macro transactions. As example we describe Credit transactions
CL(tax,y) that provide Loans from Creditors at point x to Borrowers at point y
and Loan-Repayment transactions LR(t,x,y) that describe repayments from
Borrowers at point y to Creditors at point x. We use hydrodynamic-like economic
equations and derive from them the system of ordinary differential equations
that describe business cycle fluctuations of macro Credits C(t) and macro Loan-
Repayments LR(t) of the entire economics. The nature of business cycle
fluctuations is explained as oscillations of "mean risk" of economic variables
on bounded economic domain of economic space.
