Title: Screening Mothers: Representations of motherhood in Australian films from 1900 to 1988.
Authors: Caroline Myra Pascoe
ID: openalex.W72472283
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/2123/385

Although the position of mothers has changed considerably since the beginning of
the twentieth century, an idealised notion of motherhood persists. The cinema
provides a source of information about attitudes towards mothering in Australian
society which is not diminished by the fact that mothers are often marginal to
the narrative. While the study recognises that cinematic images are not
unconditionally authoritative, it rests on the belief that films have some
capacity to reflect and influence society. The films are placed in an historical
context with regard to social change in Australian society, so that the images
can be understood within the context of the time of the making and viewing of
the films. The depictions of the mother are scrutinised with regard to her
appearance, her attitude, her relationship with others and the expectations,
whether explicit or implicit, of her role. Of particular significance is what
happens to her during the film and whether she is punished or rewarded for her
behaviour. The conclusions reached after analysis are used to challenge those
ideas which assume that portrayals of motherhood are unchangeable and timeless.
The study examines Australian feature films from 1900 to 1988. To augment its
historical focus, it uses sociological, psychoanalytical and feminist
theoretical writing with special relevance for motherhood and mothering
practice. Looking at areas of importance to mothers, it comprises an exploration
of what makes a mother good or bad; the significance of the birth of female and
male children; the relationship of mothers to daughters; the mother's sexuality
and the metaphor of the missing mother. It shows that images of motherhood on
screen are organised according to political, social and economic requirements in
the community. Further, films frequently show mothers in traditional roles which
are useful for maintaining notions of patriarchal privilege in society. The
analysis exposes stereotypical depictions of motherhood which are often
inaccurate, unfair and oppressive to women.
