Title: Regret Minimization in Non-Zero-Sum Games with Applications to Building Champion Multiplayer Computer Poker Agents
Authors: Richard Gibson
ID: 1305.0034
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1305.0034

Abstract:
In two-player zero-sum games, if both players minimize their average external regret, then the average of the strategy profiles converges to a Nash equilibrium. For n-player general-sum games, however, theoretical guarantees for regret minimization are less understood. Nonetheless, Counterfactual Regret Minimization (CFR), a popular regret minimization algorithm for extensive-form games, has generated winning three-player Texas Hold'em agents in the Annual Computer Poker Competition (ACPC). In this paper, we provide the first set of theoretical properties for regret minimization algorithms in non-zero-sum games by proving that solutions eliminate iterative strict domination. We formally define \emph{dominated actions} in extensive-form games, show that CFR avoids iteratively strictly dominated actions and strategies, and demonstrate that removing iteratively dominated actions is enough to win a mock tournament in a small poker game. In addition, for two-player non-zero-sum games, we bound the worst case performance and show that in practice, regret minimization can yield strategies very close to equilibrium. Our theoretical advancements lead us to a new modification of CFR for games with more than two players that is more efficient and may be used to generate stronger strategies than previously possible. Furthermore, we present a new three-player Texas Hold'em poker agent that was built using CFR and a novel game decomposition method. Our new agent wins the three-player events of the 2012 ACPC and defeats the winning three-player programs from previous competitions while requiring less resources to generate than the 2011 winner. Finally, we show that our CFR modification computes a strategy of equal quality to our new agent in a quarter of the time of standard CFR using half the memory.
