Title: Change And Cover: Last-Mile, Pull Request-Based Regression Test Augmentation
Authors: Zitong Zhou, Matteo Paltenghi, Miryung Kim, Michael Pradel
ID: 2601.10942
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.10942

Abstract:
Software is in constant evolution, with developers frequently submitting pull
requests (PRs) to introduce new features or fix bugs. Testing PRs is critical to
maintaining software quality. Yet, even in projects with extensive test suites,
some PR-modified lines remain untested, leaving a "last-mile" regression test
gap. Existing test generators typically aim to improve overall coverage, but do
not specifically target the uncovered lines in PRs. We present Change And Cover
(ChaCo), an LLM-based test augmentation technique that addresses this gap. It
makes three contributions: (i) ChaCo considers the PR-specific patch coverage,
offering developers augmented tests for code just when it is on the developers'
mind. (ii) We identify providing suitable test context as a crucial challenge
for an LLM to generate useful tests, and present two techniques to extract
relevant test content, such as existing test functions, fixtures, and data
generators. (iii) To make augmented tests acceptable for developers, ChaCo
carefully integrates them into the existing test suite, e.g., by matching the
test's structure and style with the existing tests, and generates a summary of
the test addition for developer review. We evaluate ChaCo on 145 PRs from three
popular and complex open-source projects - SciPy, Qiskit, and Pandas. The
approach successfully helps 30% of PRs achieve full patch coverage, at the cost
of $0.11, showing its effectiveness and practicality. Human reviewers find the
tests to be worth adding (4.53/5.0), well integrated (4.2/5.0), and relevant to
the PR (4.7/5.0). Ablations show test context is crucial for context-aware test
generation, leading to 2x coverage. We submitted 12 tests, of which 8 have
already been merged, and two previously unknown bugs were exposed and fixed. We
envision our approach to be integrated into CI workflows, automating the last
mile of regression test augmentation.
