Title: How well LLM-based test generation techniques perform with newer LLM versions?
Authors: Michael Konstantinou, Renzo Degiovanni, Mike Papadakis
ID: 2601.09695
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.09695

Abstract:
The rapid evolution of Large Language Models (LLMs) has strongly impacted
software engineering, leading to a growing number of studies on automated unit
test generation. However, the standalone use of LLMs without post-processing has
proven insufficient, often producing tests that fail to compile or achieve high
coverage. Several techniques have been proposed to address these issues,
reporting improvements in test compilation and coverage. While important,
LLM-based test generation techniques have been evaluated against relatively weak
baselines (for todays' standards), i.e., old LLM versions and relatively weak
prompts, which may exacerbate the performance contribution of the approaches. In
other words, stronger (newer) LLMs may obviate any advantage these techniques
bring. We investigate this issue by replicating four state-of-the-art LLM-based
test generation tools, HITS, SymPrompt, TestSpark, and CoverUp that include
engineering components aimed at guiding the test generation process through
compilation and execution feedback, and evaluate their relative effectiveness
and efficiency over a plain LLM test generation method. We integrate current LLM
versions in all approaches and run an experiment on 393 classes and 3,657
methods. Our results show that the plain LLM approach can outperform previous
state-of-the-art approaches in all test effectiveness metrics we used: line
coverage (by 17.72%), branch coverage (by 19.80%) and mutation score (by
20.92%), and it does so at a comparable cost (LLM queries). We also observe that
the granularity at which the plain LLM is applied has a significant impact on
the cost. We therefore propose targeting first the program classes, where test
generation is more efficient, and then the uncovered methods to reduce the
number of LLM requests. This strategy achieves comparable (slightly higher)
effectiveness while requiring about 20% fewer LLM requests.
