Title: Hierarchical Testing of a Hybrid Machine Learning-Physics Global Atmosphere Model
Authors: Ziming Chen, L. Ruby Leung, Wenyu Zhou, Jian Lu, Sandro W. Lubis et al.
ID: 2602.11313
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.11313

Abstract:
Machine learning (ML)-based models have demonstrated high skill and
computational efficiency, often outperforming conventional physics-based models
in weather and subseasonal predictions. While prior studies have assessed their
fidelity in capturing synoptic-scale atmospheric dynamics, their performance
across timescales and under out-of-distribution forcing, such as +3K or +4K
uniform-warming forcings, and the sources of biases remain elusive, to establish
the model reliability for Earth science. Here, we design three sets of
experiments targeting synoptic-scale phenomena, interannual variability, and
out-of-distribution uniform-warming forcings. We evaluate the Neural General
Circulation Model (NeuralGCM), a hybrid model integrating a dynamical core with
ML-based component, against observations and physics-based Earth system models
(ESMs). At the synoptic scale, NeuralGCM captures the evolution and propagation
of extratropical cyclones with performance comparable to ESMs. At the
interannual scale, when forced by El Niño-Southern Oscillation sea surface
temperature (SST) anomalies, NeuralGCM successfully reproduces associated
teleconnection patterns but exhibits deficiencies in capturing nonlinear
response. Under out-of-distribution uniform-warming forcings, NeuralGCM
simulates similar responses in global-average temperature and precipitation and
reproduces large-scale tropospheric circulation features similar to those in
ESMs. Notable weaknesses include overestimating the tracks and spatial extent of
extratropical cyclones, biases in the teleconnected wave train triggered by
tropical SST anomalies, and differences in upper-level warming and stratospheric
circulation responses to SST warming compared to physics-based ESMs. The causes
of these weaknesses were explored.
