Title: The challenge of generating and evolving real-life like synthetic test data without accessing real-world raw data -- a Systematic Review
Authors: Maj-Annika Tammisto, Faiz Ali Shah, Daniel Rodriguez, Dietmar Pfahl
ID: 2602.06609
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.06609

Abstract:
Background: High-level system testing of applications that use data from
e-Government services as input requires test data that is real-life-like but
where the privacy of personal information is guaranteed. Applications with such
strong requirement include information exchange between countries, medicine,
banking, etc. This review aims to synthesize the current state-of-the-practice
in this domain. Objectives: The objective of this Systematic Review is to
identify existing approaches for creating and evolving synthetic test data
without using real-life raw data. Methods: We followed well-known methodologies
for conducting systematic literature reviews, including the ones from Kitchenham
as well as guidelines for analysing the limitations of our review and its
threats to validity. Results: A variety of methods and tools exist for creating
privacy-preserving test data. Our search found 1,013 publications in IEEE
Xplore, ACM Digital Library, and SCOPUS. We extracted data from 75 of those
publications and identified 37 approaches that answer our research question
partly. A common prerequisite for using these methods and tools is direct access
to real-life data for data anonymization or synthetic test data generation. Nine
existing synthetic test data generation approaches were identified that were
closest to answering our research question. Nevertheless, further work would be
needed to add the ability to evolve synthetic test data to the existing
approaches. Conclusions: None of the publications really covered our
requirements completely, only partially. Synthetic test data evolution is a
field that has not received much attention from researchers but needs to be
explored in Digital Government Solutions, especially since new legal regulations
are being placed in force in many countries.
