Title: WebTestPilot: Agentic End-to-End Web Testing against Natural Language Specification by Inferring Oracles with Symbolized GUI Elements
Authors: Xiwen Teoh, Yun Lin, Duc-Minh Nguyen, Ruofei Ren, Wenjie Zhang et al.
ID: 2602.11724
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.11724

Abstract:
Visual language model (VLM) agents show great promise in automating end-to-end
(E2E) web testing against requirements in natural language. However, the
probabilistic nature of language models can have inherent hallucinations.
Therefore, given a detected inconsistency between the requirement and the web
application, it is hard to distinguish whether it stems from the hallucination
or a real application bug. Addressing this issue presents two core technical
challenges: the implicit oracle inference challenge, where the agent must act as
its own oracle to implicitly decide if the application's behavior is correct
without guidance, and the probabilistic inference challenge, where an LLM's
inconsistent reasoning undermines its trustworthiness as an oracle. Existing
LLM-based approaches fail to capture such implicit oracles, either by treating
any page navigation that doesn't crash as a success, or by checking each state
in isolation, thus missing bugs dependent on context from prior steps. We
introduce WebTestPilot, an LLM-based agent designed to address these challenges.
WebTestPilot uses (1) a symbolization layer which detects and symbolizes
critical GUI elements on the web application into symbols (i.e., variables) and
(2) translates natural language specification into a sequence of steps, each of
which is equipped with inferred pre- and post-conditions over the symbols as an
oracle. This oracle captures data, temporal, and causal dependencies, enabling
the validation of implicit requirements. To advance research in this area, we
build a benchmark of bug-injected web apps for evaluating NL-to-E2E testing. The
results show that WebTestPilot achieves a task completion rate of 99%, with 96%
precision and 96% recall in bug detection, outperforming the best baseline (+70
precision, +27 recall). The agent generalizes across diverse natural language
inputs and model scales.
