Title: Young women selling sex online &amp;ndash; narratives on regulating feelings
Authors: Linda Jönsson, Carl Göran Svedin, Margareta Hydén
ID: openalex.W2034710151
URL: https://doi.org/10.2147/ahmt.s77324

The current study concerns young women's life stories of their experiences
selling sex online before the age of 18. The aim was to gain an understanding of
young women's perceptions of the reasons they started, continued, and stopped
selling sex. The study included interviews with 15 young women between the ages
of 15 and 25 (M=18.9). Thematic analysis was used to identify similarities and
differences in the narratives. Three themes and eight sub-themes were identified
in relation to different stages in their lives in the sex trade. The themes were
organized into three parts, each with its own storyline: "Entering - adverse
life experiences"; traumatic events: feeling different and being excluded.
"Immersion - using the body as a tool for regulating feelings"; being seen:
being touched: being in control: affect regulation and self-harming. "Exiting -
change or die"; living close to death: the process of quitting. The informants
all had stable social lives in the sense that they had roofs over their heads,
food to eat, and no substance-abuse issues. None had a third party who arranged
the sexual contacts and none were currently trafficked. They described how their
experiences of traumatic events and of feeling different and excluded had led
them into the sex trade. Selling sex functioned as a way to be seen, to handle
traumatic events, and to regulate feelings. Professionals working with young
people who sell sex online need to understand the complex web of mixed feelings
and emotional needs that can play a role in selling sex. Young people selling
sex might need guidance in relationship building as well as help processing
traumatic experiences and ending self-harming behavior. Further studies are
needed on the functions of online sex selling and on the exit process for young
people, in order to prevent entrance and facilitate exiting.
