Title: International Council for Health, Physical Education, Recreation, Sport and Dance (ICHPER-SD): partnering ACHPER
Authors: Timothy Lynch
ID: openalex.W2279868961
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10026.1/6470

Australian Council for Health, Physical Education and Recreation (ACHPER)
National Strategy (2014-2016) lists four strategic priorities, which includes;
‘to identify and promote broader ACHPER collaborations and partnerships’. The
International Council for Health, Physical Education, Recreation, Sport and
Dance (ICHPER-SD) shares vision and purpose with ACHPER and PENZ (Physical
Education New Zealand), specifically with an international focus. Hence, ACHPER,
PENZ and ICHPER-SD, working in collaboration, compliment and strengthen one
another in promoting active and healthy living, as evidenced throughout history.
The umbrella international organisation ICHPER was first conceived in 1950, and
officially founded in Rome, Italy in 1958. The theme of the first ICHPER world
congress was ‘Child Health and the School’. There have since been 36 world
congresses, 32 regional congresses and numerous forums, conferences and
symposia. The ICHPER name was extended to include ‘Sport’ and ‘Dance’ (ICHPER-
SD) in Yokohama, Japan in 1993. The latest congress, the 56th ICHPER-SD
Anniversary World Congress &amp; Exposition was recently held in Bahrain
(December, 2014). ACHPER was formally known as Australian Physical Education
Association (APEA) and the name change was a direct result of the ICHPER-SD
first and only world congress to be held in Oceania (Sydney, 1970). Some may
remember the ICHPER-SD (Oceania) first Regional congress, held in Wellington, NZ
in 2006. The title of the 1970 Sydney world congress was 'New Endeavours in
Physical Education, Health Education and Recreation', it was of international
significance, the best attended conference in the history of APEA and a
milestone for ‘Health, Physical Education and Recreation’ (Kirk &amp; Macdonald,
1998). Proud ACHPER member and ICHPER-SD Vice-President (representing Oceania
region), Dr. Timothy Lynch shares the strong history, direction and opportunity
for working collaboratively with one of the oldest, largest and most prestigious
international umbrella organisations.
