Title: Exploration of identity construction and reconstruction during drug using careers, and the factors that influence identity transformation
Authors: Siobain O'Donnell
ID: openalex.W2588944709
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10788/2945

Problematic drug and alcohol users generally construct a drug using identity in
order to justify and continue drug using, and to minimise the consequences of
it. When drug users make the decision to stop they need to re-construct a non-
drug user identity. This thesis explores the process of identity construction
and re-construction before, during and after drug using careers. It investigates
elements that support the reconstruction of identity as non-drug user and
barriers to that reconstruction. &#13;\nThis thesis employed a qualitative
methodology. Drawing on the Biographic Narrative Interpretive Method, it
collected life histories from sixteen former drug users. A qualitative analysis
was conducted on the data collected which elucidated their experiences before,
during and after drug using and their experience of identity transformation
throughout their drug using careers. &#13;\nThe findings describe how drug users
experienced the transition into a drug using identity as a relatively
straightforward process, while the reconstruction to a non-drug using identity
was difficult, precarious and at times overwhelming. The findings also note that
the main supports that were reported as useful in identity reconstruction were
those of parents and families, some treatment interventions and membership of
12-Step programmes. This study concludes that successful recovery from drug use
is significantly related to the success of identity transition from drug user to
non-drug user. Lack of success in identity reconstruction is an indicator of
higher rates of relapse, readmission to services and increased difficulty
negotiating a drug free lifestyle. When moving away from the ‘addict’ identity
towards a ‘non-addict’ identity, the participants reported how they gained a
sense of themselves as their new identities emerged. The majority of
participants reverted to their previous ‘unspoiled’ identity. The analysis of
the data identifies several barriers to effective identity transformation which
negatively impacted on successful recovery. Participants experienced great
difficulty in moving away from their drug using peers as no other social group
existed for them to interact with, with the exception of 12-Step programmes. In
early recovery they had still not reconciled relationships with family and
former friends and felt exceedingly isolated when separated from drug using
friends. This interim period was described as lonely, isolating and frightening.
Further barriers were identified as the consequence of stigma and public opinion
which were portrayed in stereotypical, negative terms, and lack of support and
isolation in early recovery, especially after relapse. A further barrier was the
difficulty re-engaging with services following relapse.&#13;\nFourteen of the
sixteen participants related that they experienced membership of 12-Step
programmes as the greatest support in recovery. From their reflections this
study has found that the telling and retelling of personal narrative, along with
a renewed sense of spiritual self and a tradition of helping, all of which exist
within 12-Step programmes, facilitate positive identity change. Reframed
narratives within the 12-Step framework enabled the availability of a new
unstigmatised presentation of everyday self, which permitted a new sense of
their subjective social reconstruction of an unspoiled identity. Moving away
from the social construction of addiction and deviance, the retold narrative
enabled identity transformation to occur. Author keywords: Addiction, identity
construction and reconstruction, drug using careers, recovery, stigma
