Title: What is Arts Entrepreneurship? Tracking the Development of its Definition in Scholarly Journals
Authors: Woong Jo Chang, Margaret Jane Wyszomirski
ID: openalex.W2805952683
URL: https://doi.org/10.1353/artv.2015.0010

In this study, we investigate the ways in which arts entrepreneurship has been
operationalized and defined in the literature. We identify eight scholarly
journals in arts administration and policy, in business administration, and in
nonprofit marketing published during 2003-2013 and review articles published in
these journals. Our review found that the scholarly literature on arts
entrepreneurship has in fact been quite scarce. We also examine all articles in
Artivate, a journal that specializes in arts entrepreneurship. Taking the
literature as a whole, we found a plethora of meanings used in the literature,
indicating an, as yet, unsettled definition. We suggest that some analytical
clarity can be obtained by grouping the many meanings of arts entrepreneurship
into five analytical "levels": Personal Character traits, Goals, Strategies,
Tactics, and Context. We also suggest a possible general definition: "arts
entrepreneurship" is a management process through which cultural workers seek to
support their creativity and autonomy, advance their capacity for adaptability,
and create artistic as well as economic and social value. This management
process involves an ongoing set of innovative choices and risks intended to
recombine resources and pursue new opportunities to produce artistic, economic,
and social value. Identifying the emerging clusters from the meanings found in
the literature, we conclude that to understand arts entrepreneurs, one must
focus on the innovative combinations of strategy, individual skills, and mindset
operating in each case of arts entrepreneurship and its context. As arts
entrepreneurship is a constant exercise in recombination of skillsets, the
possibility of flexible recipes begins to reveal what might be regarded as the
recombinant DNA of arts entrepreneurship.
