Title: “They’ll Always Find a Way to Get to You”: Technology Use in Adolescent Romantic Relationships and Its Role in Dating Violence and Abuse
Authors: Karlie E. Stonard, Erica Bowen, Kate Walker, Shelley A. Price
ID: openalex.W1528402399
URL: https://doi.org/10.1177/0886260515590787

Electronic communication technology (ECT), such as mobile phones and online
communication tools, is widely used by adolescents; however, the availability of
such tools may have both positive and negative impacts within the context of
romantic relationships. While an established literature has documented the
nature, prevalence, and impact of traditional forms of adolescent dating
violence and abuse (ADVA), limited empirical investigation has focused on the
role of ECT in ADVA or what shall be termed technology-assisted adolescent
dating violence and abuse (TAADVA) and how adolescents perceive the impact of
TAADVA relative to ADVA. In this article, the authors explore the role ECT plays
in adolescent romantic relationships and psychologically abusive and controlling
ADVA behaviors and its perceived impact. An opportunity sample of 52 adolescents
(22 males and 30 females) between the ages of 12 and 18 years participated in
the study. One all-female and seven mixed-gendered semi-structured focus groups
were conducted. Thematic analysis was used to identify three superordinate
themes, including (a) perceived healthy versus unhealthy communication, (b)
perceived monitoring and controlling communication, and (c) perceived impact of
technology-assisted abuse compared with that in person. While ECTs had a
positive impact on the development and maintenance of adolescent romantic
relationships, such tools also provided a new avenue for unhealthy, harassment,
monitoring, and controlling behaviors within these relationships. ECT was also
perceived to provide unique impacts in terms of making TAADVA seem both less
harmful and more harmful than ADVA experienced in person. Adolescents'
perceptions and experiences of ECT in romantic relationships and TAADVA may also
vary be gender. Implications of the findings are discussed, and recommendations
are made for future research.
