Title: Warrior Spirit: From Invasion to Fusion Music in the Mapuche Territory of Southern Chile
Authors: Jacob Rekedal
ID: openalex.W573642113
URL: https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1xg8s85n

This dissertation chronicles the cultural, musical and performative fronts
during two centuries of struggle and negotiation between Mapuche and Chilean
societies. The perspective is mainly ethnomusicological, including two years of
fieldwork in the Araucanía region, concerning new genres of Mapuche fusion
music such as rock and hip-hop. This writing demonstrates how Mapuche
expressions and representations accrued various forms of value during Chile's
modernization--including colonization, nation building, the emergence of modern
social movements, and the implementation of neoliberal policies--and how artists
contend with and subvert those values today.\tThe opening chapters are
historical. Following the invasion of Araucanía in the 1880s, Mapuche political
activism eventually gained traction by carefully managing a relationship with
the Chilean political establishment, while also cultivating a unique approach to
political processes that incorporated preexisting rituals. Concurrently, the
Mapuche transitioned from adversaries to objects of study, while concepts such
as folklore took root in Chilean society. As popular culture took note of
Mapuche sounds and symbols toward the mid-twentieth century, non-Mapuche artists
and activists codified their progressive ideologies through their embrace of
indigeneity, exemplified in art music, and most famously, nueva canción.\tBased
directly on fieldwork, the second half of the thesis discusses how Mapuche
cultural continuity has involved both the recovery of traditions and the
incorporation of non-traditional elements. I describe the conversion of a
mingako ritual into a festival of music and poetry in the Mapuche comunidad of
Saltapura. This transfer from agriculture to expressive culture demonstrates the
diminishing value of Mapuche lands, parallel with the increasing value of their
expressions, under neoliberal multiculturalism. Meanwhile, Mapuche heavy metal
and hip-hop groups such as Pewmayén and Weichafe Newen build their music around
ancestral principles of sound, ritual and language, raising the question as to
whether Mapuche musical elements thus become ingredients of popular music, or
whether popular music becomes Mapuche for incorporating these elements. Through
detailed discussions of this music and its broader contexts, this dissertation
issues a critique of the culture concept underpinning neoliberal
multiculturalism, inherited from the investigations of the Mapuche during the
early republican period.
