Title: “Obviously in the cool group they wear designer things”
Authors: Agnès Nairn, Fiona Spotswood
ID: openalex.W2126624651
URL: https://doi.org/10.1108/ejm-10-2013-0557

Purpose – This paper aims to propose the lens of social practice theory (SPT) as
a means of deepening insights into childhood consumer culture.
Design/methodology/approach – The data comprise four qualitative interviews and
ten focus groups with 58 8-13 year olds in six diverse schools across England,
Scotland and Northern Ireland. Transcripts were coded with NVIVO10. Analysis was
guided by the three elements of SPT: materials, meaning and competence. Findings
– Branded technology products and clothes consistently combined with both the
socially sanctioned objective of achieving and maintaining a place in the peer
hierarchy and also the three skills the authors have labelled “social
consumption recognition”, “social consumption performance” and “social
consumption communication” in regular, predictable ways to produce an ordered
and, thus, reproducible nexus of actions. Analysis of the inter-relationship
between these elements showed that children’s consumption is a specific
practice, embedded in their everyday routines. Consumption is also linked
inextricably to social position; children’s variable performance of it links
with their degree of social acceptance and popularity. Research
limitations/implications – Although the study included a broad cross-section of
school catchment areas, they cannot be said to represent all British children.
Nonetheless, SPT provides an alternative theoretical perspective on children’s
consumption by shifting the focus away from the child, the social context or
even the products, thus ceasing to privilege the notion that consumption is
something external to children that they learn to be socialised into; or to
consciously use for their own symbolic or other purposes; or that they have to
be protected from. Social implications – Consumption practice is deeply embedded
in children’s relationships and is inextricably linked to their well-being.
Policies seeking to tackle any single element of the practice, such as media
literacy training, are only likely to have limited effectiveness. This research
implies that responsible marketing measures need to concentrate on the links
between all the elements. Originality/value – This SPT analysis of children’s
consumption makes three contributions. First, it provides a much-needed new
theoretical perspective beyond the dominant but limited “consumer socialisation”
research paradigm that confines analysis of children’s consumption to the
functioning of their individual cognitive capacity. Second, it suggests new
research methodologies for understanding the interaction between children and
the commercial world. Third, it offers a different approach to policymakers
tasked with the controversial issue of regulating marketing to children.
