Title: Gamification in Education: A Systematic Mapping Study
Authors: Darina Dicheva, Christo Dichev, Gennady Agre, Galia Angelova
ID: openalex.W2187022131
URL: http://www.ifets.info/journals/18_3/6.pdf

Introduction Traditional schooling is perceived as ineffective and boring by
many students. Although teachers continuously seek novel instructional
approaches, it is largely agreed that today's schools face major problems around
student motivation and engagement (Lee & Hammer, 2011). The use of educational
games as learning tools is a promising approach due to the games' abilities to
teach and the fact that they reinforce not only knowledge but also important
skills such as problem-solving, collaboration, and communication. Games have
remarkable motivational power; they utilize a number of mechanisms to encourage
people to engage with them, often without any reward, just for the joy of
playing and the possibility to win. Creating a highly engaging, full-blown
instructional game however is difficult, time consuming, and costly (Kapp,
2012a), while typically targeting only a single set of learning objectives as
chosen by the game designer. In addition, their effective classroom adoption
requires certain technical infrastructure and appropriate pedagogical
integration. As opposed to using elaborate games requiring a large amount of
design and development efforts, the approach suggests using game thinking and
game design elements to improve learners' engagement and motivation.
Gamification, defined by Deterding et al. (2011) as the use of game design
elements in non-game contexts, is a fairly new and rapidly growing field. The
concept of gamification is different from that of an educational or serious
game. While the latter describes the design of full-fledged games for non-
entertainment purposes, applications merely employ elements of games. The term
is quite recent: According to (Deterding et al., 2011) its first documented use
is in 2008 but it did not see widespread adoption before the second half of
2010. Nevertheless, the concept itself is not new. For example, badges and ranks
have been long used in the military, in the early Soviet era, game elements were
used by the Soviet Union leaders as a substitute for monetary incentives for
performing at work, etc. In recent years gamification has seen rapid adoption in
business, marketing, corporate management, and wellness and ecology initiatives.
This is driven by its potential to shape users' behavior in a desirable
direction. Loyalty programs such as the frequent-flyer programs, Foursquare, and
Nike+ are often given as examples of successful gamified mass-market products.
Stackoverflow.com provides another example in which users' reputations increase
as they answer questions and receive votes for their answers. Online education
sites such as codeacademy.com and khanacademy.org use game elements to better
engage users. The more courses and lessons that users complete, the more badges
they earn. Sites like eBay and Fitocracy use game elements to keep people
engaged and to encourage friendly competition between users. Gamification is
still rising in popularity. According to Gartner's Hype Cycle (Gartner, 2013), a
research methodology that outlines an emerging technology's viability for
commercial success, gamification is at the peak of the Hype Cycle in 2013, with
an expectation for reaching the productivity plateau in five to ten years. This
position, however, mainly reflects its use in business contexts. The penetration
of the gamification trend in educational settings seems to be still climbing up
to the top, as indicated by the amount and annual distribution of the reviewed
works. This paper presents the results of a study of the published works on the
application of gamification to education, which aims to shed light on the
tendencies and emerging practices in this area. There are few literature reviews
on gamification (see Xu, 2012; Hamari, Koivisto, & Sarsa, 2014; Nah, Zeng,
Telaprolu, Ayyappa, & Eschenbrenner, 2014), with only the last one focusing on
education. This study differs from the latter by presenting a thematic analysis
instead of narrative summaries that focus on a qualitative review. …
