Title: Ethnomathematics of Indigenous Peoples of the North
Authors: Galina D. Tereshkina, Nаdezhda I. Merlinа, Svetlana A. Kartashova, Motrеnа D. Dyachkovskaya, Natalia A. Pyryrco
ID: openalex.W2048644174
URL: https://doi.org/10.5901/mjss.2015.v6n2s3p233

Education of the value to a particular society in the Northern regions of the
Russian Federation is connected with socio-cultural and economic transformations
in the places of dense residence of small-numbered peoples of the North, which
leads to the necessity of improving the system of upbringing and education of
children in encampments. In this regard, the process of education should
organically include axiological aspects of human life: the interiorization of
nomadic peoples’ values, ensuring the development of a student's personality.
The article discloses the content of the regional-ethnic component of
mathematics education in which the learning content is in unity with the basics
of mathematical science and ethnomathematics of indigenous peoples of the North.
The leading approach to study this problem, allowing to identify the main
content of the course "Ethnomathematics" of the regional-ethnic component, is
the analysis of scientific, educational, fiction literature and systematization
of the knowledge accumulated by many generations (astronomical, phenological,
economic) and elementary issues on the development of numbering, mathematical
terminology, the emergence of measures associated with a unique culture and
traditional economic activities of the nomadic peoples of the North. The main
results of the article: ethnomathematics was being formed by the course of the
history of the region’s reclamation, was being enriched by the adaptive
features, as well as by the spiritual and economic practices of the Northern
peoples. It is possible to talk about the viability of the proposed contents of
the specialized course "Ethnomathematics" of the regional component in the
regions of Russia with the indigenous small-numbered peoples of the North. DOI:
10.5901/mjss.2015.v6n2s3p233
