Title: The architecture of error: matter, measure, and the misadventures of precision
Authors: Francesca Hughes
ID: openalex.W633114347
URL: https://doi.org/10.5860/choice.189788

This PhD submission comprises two parts, the above book published in 2014 and
its critical review. The latter, rather than transplant the book into the
present, looks back to it, across the extraordinary contextual changes of the
interval, to its making and reception, from the positions of both the present
and 2014. Given the book employs diverse theoretical frameworks relevant to the
material it interrogates, the review itself is framework-agnostic and instead is
structured via a series of questions and recursive conceits or mirrors. Both the
review’s (re)contextualisation and framework-agnosticism are elaborated in a
foreword that acts as a guide. The review also comprises a summary of the book
in question, the abstract of which is below: Last century witnessed a quantum
increase in both effective and surplus precision in all material processes.
‘precision’ mean when it is redundant? What is the price we pay for our use of
generative or explanatory models that are made more reductive in order to be
(apparently) more precise? What might we learn from an elaboration of error as a
productive category? To address these questions the analysis sets out a latent
subtext in the body of architecture’s twentieth century discourse: the
accelerated unravelling of the relations between precision and error. This takes
the form of a critique of the role of precision – itself a complexly imprecise
term – in architectural culture, and a claim that behind the architect’s now
acute fetishisation of redundant precision lies a special fear of physical
error. It posits that each of the seminal turns that govern our historiographies
of modernity can be understood to have been silently orchestrated by a fear of
error. In each, error does not go away but necessarily reconfigures, and in so
doing, also reconfigures the architect’s ever-precarious relations to material
life. Focusing on the key moments of intensification in the material ecologies
of architecture’s twentieth century, the book examines how the cultivation of
surplus precision laid the ground-work for the removal of ornament, the
rejection of organic materials, the arrival of ‘science’ onto the building site,
the rhetorical obstacles that blighted early cybernetics, the subsequent ‘death’
of concept and the digitised operations in which an algorithm arbitrates new
form. The arc of the argument is organized not by the subject’s chronology but
by its notional topography: we enter and exit at the surface with the drawing’s
interrogation of precision in chapter 1 and with the substitution of ornament by
redundant precision in the closing chapter. Following a second chapter that
briefly sets out Aristotle’s conflation of error with matter (and not form), the
middle chapters take us through the interior of error and precision relations
via two key internal systems and their historic ruptures. The first, on
materiality (in chapters 3 and 4) is defined technologically; the second, on
reproduction (in chapters 5, 6, and 7), culturally. Although segregated, the
analysis, if nothing else, demonstrates the inseparability of the technological
from the cultural when it comes to error. At the time of writing many of the
questions raised had been neglected in architectural research, however they had
been keenly addressed by key voices in adjacent fields: visual art, the
histories and philosophies of science, STS, feminist and Gender Studies. Thus
the critiques of techno-determinism emerging in STS, Nancy Cartwright’s critique
of inference and Evelyn Fox Keller’s of metaphoric epistemologies are brought to
bear on the effect of instrumentalism, inference and metaphoric trading on
precision in architecture. Equally, close analysis of the material techniques of
several visual artists that maintain alternative economies of error in their
practice – Vija Celmins, Barbara Hepworth, Gordon Matta Clark, Rachel Whiteread
– illustrates the potential of error as an active, critical category in
architectural production. Gordon Matta-Clark understood that precision in
architecture is a political question first; surplus precision does serve a
purpose, it is just undeclared. At the same time, any endeavour to produce a
comprehensive or even coherent theory of error would by definition be a fallacy:
error will always evade containment and mutate to escape. What I proposed in
this book is an active elaboration of error as a category that acts critically
on our relations to redundant or false precision, short-circuits its material
interference, undercuts its hold on our practice and imagination, interrogates
the mechanisms that install and protect it, and understands it for what it is:
an architecture of fear whose politics we must question.
