Title: Gender and Trauma from World War I to the War in Iraq: Narrative in the Aftermath of Loss
Authors: Jenny Young Kijowski
ID: openalex.W2417698709
URL: https://academicworks.cuny.edu/gc_etds/1007

Trauma Studies is predicated on the idea of unspeakability: events that are
experienced as deep psychic wounds break the frameworks for understanding,
resulting in an inability to translate the experience into language. Scholars
who study the literature of trauma are thus faced with this central paradox: how
do writers speak the unspeakable? Trauma literature is generally regarded as
texts that not only are thematically centered on a traumatic event or series of
traumatic events, but also structurally reflect the symptoms of trauma. Thus the
formal qualities of trauma narratives include fragmentation, contradiction,
repetition, circularity, and intrusion, such that these texts come to embody
trauma itself. The structure, then, does some of the work of silently speaking
traumatic aftermath. What is missing from most analytical approaches to trauma
literature, however, is a consideration of how subject positions contribute to
traumatic experience. Issues of gender, race, sexuality, class, and other
culturally constructed categories of identity -- factors that are critical to
the politics of speaking and silencing -- have been suppressed in favor of a
unifying and universal theory of trauma. Gender, in particular, is a key element
not only in what kinds of trauma one might be vulnerable to, but in the very
notion of trauma itself. This dissertation examines the historical development
of trauma and PTSD in conjunction with shifting notions of gender in order to
construct a framework with which to analyze the literature of trauma. With a
focus on war narratives, this dissertation investigates how gender roles
position subjects as victims of trauma, how gender ideology influences the ways
in which trauma is internalized, how gender norms determine the ways in which
trauma is externalized in narrative, and how the subject's gendered identity is
produced through traumatic experience. Thus, this project's investigation will
go beyond an examination of the similarities and differences between men's and
women's stories, in order to analyze the role of gender difference in the very
process of bearing witness. The texts selected for this investigation represent
some of the major wars of the 20th and 21st centuries, wars that also ushered in
radical changes in the ways that gender has been configured. Beginning with
World War I and the emergence of shell shock, I begin my analysis with Vera
Brittain's Testament of Youth. From there, I examine Elie Wiesel's Day, the
third and final installment of his Holocaust trilogy. Tim O'Brien's The Things
They Carried is the central text for my analysis of Vietnam War literature. For
my final chapter, I examine two works written by female veterans of the war in
Iraq: Love My Rifle More Than You by Kayla Williams and Shade It Black by Jess
Goodell. These works are just a few examples of texts in which gender and trauma
work with and against each other in the task of speaking the unspeakable.
