Title: Gender‐specific factors associated with shorter sleep duration at age 3 years
Authors: Sabine Plancoulaine, Sandrine Lioret, Nolwenn Regnault, Barbara Heude, Marie‐Aline Charles
ID: openalex.W1515934790
URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/jsr.12308

Total sleep duration has been decreasing among children in the last decades.
Short sleep duration (SSD) has been associated with deleterious health
consequences, such as excess weight/obesity. Risk factors for SSD have already
been studied among school-aged children and adolescents, but inconsistent
results have been reported regarding possible gender differences. Studies
reporting such relationships are scarce in preschoolers, despite the importance
of this period for adopting healthy behaviour. We aimed to investigate factors
associated with SSD in 3-year-old boys (n = 546) and girls (n = 482) in a French
Mother-Child Cohort (EDEN Study). Children were born between 2003 and 2006 in
two French university hospitals. Clinical examinations and parent self-reported
questionnaires allowed us to collect sociodemographic (e.g. income, education,
family situation, child-minding system), maternal [e.g. body mass index (BMI),
parity, depression, breastfeeding duration] and child's characteristics (e.g.
gender, birth weight, term, physical activity and TV viewing duration, food
consumption, usual sleep time). Sleep duration/24-h period was calculated and
SSD was defined as <12 h. Analyses were performed using logistic regression. The
mean sleep duration was 12 h 35 ± 56 min, with 91% of the children napping.
Patterns of risk factors associated with SSD differed according to gender. In
addition to parental presence when falling asleep, short sleep duration was
associated strongly positively with high BMI Z-score and TV viewing duration
among boys and with familial home child-minding and lower scores on the 'fruits
and vegetables' dietary pattern among girls. These results suggest either a
patterning of parental behaviours that differs according to gender, or a gender-
specific sleep physiology, or both.
