Title: DEVELOPMENTS IN DESIGN PEDAGOGY
Authors: Michael Tovey
ID: openalex.W2563177749
URL: https://pureportal.coventry.ac.uk/en/publications/e8638d2c-c5e7-4270-aaac-97beeb54672d

There is a long tradition of teaching design through design practice in
universities and colleges. The end goal for graduates is to achieve a level of
capability to function as designers in the professional world. This paper
describes recent design education research by the author and others. It has
taken a number of directions, focusing on the designer, the design context and
the design interface. The end goal is programmes which are directed towards
equipping graduates for entry to the community of professional practice. With
the engagement of practitioners in the process, various teaching strategies can
accommodate these approaches. The studio, tutorial, library and crit. are the
traditional components, but using them effectively requires a deep understanding
of the designerly way of knowing, and success depends on facilitating the agile
navigation through the design process. Learning experiences should develop
natural motivations to create a resilient, informed and sustainable capacity.
Transformative learning is the key to gaining entry to the various practitioner
communities. Each has its signature pedagogy and tutors support their students
to become designers in ways specific to particular disciplines. They approach
their teaching in qualitatively different ways, and engaging with the social
practices and visual codes which constitute the particular design practice,
illustrating them through case studies.. This can be approached by strengthening
studio culture to provide safe spaces for creative and problem-centred learning
and 'gateway' strategies of assessment. Key to sustaining motivation in this
context is the toleration of design uncertainty as a threshold concept.
Negotiating it successfully involves entering a liminal space in order to
develop confidence and skills. Students need the time, space and structure to
immerse themselves into a design brief, engaging in a reflective process to
resolve the contradictions of a dual processing cognitive model. This work has
been brought together in a recent publication which provides a synthesis and
overview.
