Title: An indigenous kaupapa Māori approach: mother’s experiences of partner violence and the nurturing of affectional bonds with tamariki
Authors: Alayne Hall
ID: openalex.W2177901702
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10292/9273

This thesis examines the important relationship dynamics between Māori mothers
and their tamariki (children) when exposure to partner violence is experienced.
The research is contextualised within a Kaupapa Māori methodology where
Indigenous qualitative methods provide the foundations for theorising and
researching. The study investigated twelve Māori mothers’ experiences of partner
violence, and the fostering of affectional bonds with their tamariki. The
context for examining the interface between these two conditions included a Mana
Wāhine approach and Pūrākau - a Māori narrative story-telling process where
Māori mothers shared their experiences of partner violence and mothering. The
pūrākau provided the main source of data from which Te-ata-tu Pūrākau emerged as
a newly developed Indigenous analysis method. &#13;\nAttachment theory provided
useful insights concerning the nature in which affectional bonds develop between
a young child and their primary caregiver, most often the mother. In this study
whakapapa is fundamental to whānau, hapū and iwi, providing the cultural
construct for understanding the way in which affectional bonds are developed and
fostered in Māori kin based groups. Attachment theory is contrasted with Māori
understandings that have a primary focus on whakapapa (genealogy) and
Tūhonotanga as two important concepts for understanding the nature of Māori
relationships. The women who participated in this research study experienced
different levels of disconnection from traditional Māori society where the
break-down of traditional values contributed to their sense of mournfulness,
mistrust, disillusionment, confusion, cynicism and a deep longing for healthy
relationships. Some of the findings from this research are consistent with what
we currently know about violence against women and children. Principally the
pūrākau have revealed the need to develop healing pathways that validate core
values that underpin a secure Māori identity, where Mana Wāhine and Mana Tangata
provide the platform for positive relationship building.
