Title: Debating Darija: Language Ideology and the Written Representation of Moroccan Arabic in Morocco.
Authors: Jennifer Lee Hall
ID: openalex.W1432233503
URL: https://hdl.handle.net/2027.42/111375

Morocco has witnessed the emergence of new literacy practices in private and
public space. Moroccan Arabic, the colloquial, traditionally “unwritten” variety
of Arabic, is now represented in written form in a number of new spaces such as
non-formal education, SMS text messaging, street billboard advertisements, the
scripts for dubbed foreign TV series, and a weekly news magazine. This
dissertation examines these varied contexts and considers issues regarding when,
how and by whom Moroccan Arabic literacy practices are performed in each site.
In doing so, this dissertation finds useful the analytic of ‘language
ideologies,’ beliefs people have about language, in that they serve a mediating
role between social structures and forms of talk. I argue that the emergence of
Moroccan Arabic literacy practices may create a sense of ideological disjuncture
for Moroccans who believe that Moroccan Arabic is solely an oral language that
should not be written. Ideologies linking Moroccan Arabic closely to notions of
intimacy and hchuma ‘shame,’ figure centrally in how new forms of Moroccan
Arabic are received. The success of some written forms of Moroccan Arabic in
certain domains opens the question as to a positive revaluing of Moroccan Arabic
in these new contexts and a possible shift away from diglossia as an ideology of
language. This dissertation productively uses the term ‘fractal recursivity,’
the semiotic process by which an opposition at one level can be either embedded
or expanded to another level, to understand how written representations of
Moroccan Arabic are understood across these different contexts and linguistic
forms according to an oral/written binary. I argue that individuals and
institutions actively maintain Moroccan Arabic’s lower position in the
linguistic hierarchy through the reproduction of already dominant language
ideologies that frame mother tongue languages in Morocco as oral, even when
represented in writing. I show that while the use of Moroccan Arabic in literacy
practices associated with modernity and innovation may be seen as challenging
hegemonic ideologies, recently, public debates about language policy in
education reveal that Moroccans place a high value on diglossia and thus a
future institutionalization of Moroccan Arabic literacy practices is ambiguous.
