Title: The Role of Attachment Style in Facebook Use and Social Capital: Evidence from University Students and a National Sample
Authors: Jih‐Hsuan Tammy Lin
ID: openalex.W2029637302
URL: https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2014.0341

Social networking sites (SNSs) can be beneficial tools for users to gain social
capital. Although social capital consists of emotional and informational
resources accumulated through interactions with strong or weak social network
ties, the existing literature largely ignores attachment style in this context.
This study employed attachment theory to explore individuals' attachment
orientations toward Facebook usage and toward online and offline social capital.
A university student sample (study 1) and a representative national sample
(study 2) showed consistent results. Secure attachment was positively associated
with online bonding and bridging capital and offline bridging capital.
Additionally, secure attachment had an indirect effect on all capital through
Facebook time. Avoidant attachment was negatively associated with online bonding
capital. Anxious-ambivalent attachment had a direct association with online
bonding capital and an indirect effect on all capital through Facebook.
Interaction frequency with good friends on Facebook positively predicted all
online and offline capital, whereas interaction frequency with average friends
on Facebook positively predicted online bridging capital. Interaction frequency
with acquaintances on Facebook was negatively associated with offline bonding
capital. The study concludes that attachment style is a significant factor in
guiding social orientation toward Facebook connections with different ties and
influences online social capital. The study extends attachment theory among
university students to a national sample to provide more generalizable evidence
for the current literature. Additionally, this study extends attachment theory
to the SNS setting with a nuanced examination of types of Facebook friends after
controlling extraversion. Implications for future research are discussed.
