Title: The Challenges of Afghanistan and Iraq Veterans’ Transition from Military to Civilian Life and Approaches to Reconnection
Authors: Jennifer Ahern, Miranda Worthen, Jackson Masters, Sheri A. Lippman, Emily J. Ozer
ID: openalex.W1545611472
URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0128599

Afghanistan and Iraq veterans experienced traumas during deployment, and
disrupted connections with friends and family. In this context, it is critical
to understand the nature of veterans' transition to civilian life, the
challenges navigated, and approaches to reconnection. We investigated these
issues in a qualitative study, framed by homecoming theory, that comprised in-
depth interviews with 24 veterans. Using an inductive thematic analysis
approach, we developed three overarching themes. Military as family explored how
many veterans experienced the military environment as a "family" that took care
of them and provided structure. Normal is alien encompassed many veterans
experiences of disconnection from people at home, lack of support from
institutions, lack of structure, and loss of purpose upon return to civilian
life. Searching for a new normal included strategies and supports veterans found
to reconnect in the face of these challenges. A veteran who had successfully
transitioned and provided support and advice as a peer navigator was frequently
discussed as a key resource. A minority of respondents-those who were mistreated
by the military system, women veterans, and veterans recovering from substance
abuse problems-were less able to access peer support. Other reconnection
strategies included becoming an ambassador to the military experience, and
knowing transition challenges would ease with time. Results were consistent with
and are discussed in the context of homecoming theory and social climate theory.
Social support is known to be protective for veterans, but our findings add the
nuance of substantial obstacles veterans face in locating and accessing support,
due to disconnection and unsupportive institutions. Larger scale work is needed
to better understand how to foster peer connection, build reconnection with
family, and engage the broader community to understand and support veterans;
interventions to support reconnection for veterans should be developed.
