Title: Evolving identities: Contents and processes of identity development among people in their late twenties
Authors: Johanna Carlsson
ID: openalex.W231239606
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/2077/38723

The overall aim of this thesis was to study contents and processes of identity
development among people in their late twenties. The studies are based on
identity status interviews and surveys performed with participants in the GoLD
(Gothenburg Longitudinal study of Development), at ages 25 and 29. Study I
investigated Swedish emerging adults’ expectations regarding possible future
parenthood through content analysis of identity status interviews with the 124
(58 women) participants who were not yet parents at age 25. Thematic analysis of
the participants’ interview narratives in the identity domains of parenthood and
work/family priorities showed that most participants were sure they wanted to
become parents, but often just not right now. First they wanted a stable
financial situation, a romantic relationship, and time for self-focus. More
women than men talked about parenthood as a social norm and wanted to prioritize
both work and family equally. More men than women wanted to prioritize either
work or family, most often family over work. The women gave more examples of how
they intended to solve potential work/family conflicts. Study I thus indicated
that many Swedish emerging adults postpone, but do not reject, parenthood.
Moreover, the results indicate that in emerging adulthood more women than men
consider these aspects of their identities. Study II concerned the process of
identity development between ages 25 and 29 among the 124 (63 women)
participants who took part in the study at both ages. The study had a special
focus on how people continue to evolve their identities after making identity
commitments. Each of the four identity statuses (identity achievement,
moratorium, foreclosure, and identity diffusion) was equally common at both
ages. Stability in identity status was typical of individuals assigned to all
statuses except moratorium. Further analysis of interview narratives from
participants assigned to identity achievement or foreclosure at both interview
occasions (n = 55), showed that relevant processes of continued identity
development after commitments have been made are: the ways in which people
approach changing life conditions, the extent to which they continue to engage
in meaning making, and how they continue to develop their personal life
direction. Identity achievement was connected to a deepening of the identity
narrative on all three dimensions, whereas developmental patterns connected to
foreclosure were more diverse. Study II thus showed how identity development
continues in the late twenties, also beyond identity achievement. Moreover, the
study indicated that further evolvement might be a key process through which an
established sense of identity can stay adaptive and flexible. Study III compared
two models commonly used to study identity development, the identity status
model and the dual-cycle model, among the 123 (62 women) participants who
completed both measures at age 29. These models are based on the same
theoretical framework and use the same terminology, though the associations
found between them were only modest. Further, a validation of the Swedish
version of the measure commonly used to study the dual-cycle model (Dimensions
of Identity Development Scale; DIDS) could not confirm the processes in the
model as a sufficient representation of the participants’ ratings on the DIDS.
The findings in this study call for a reconsideration of what the identity
status terminology actually means, what the identity status interview and the
DIDS actually measure, and how these models reflect people’s identity
development. In sum, this thesis shows some ways people may continue to evolve
their identities as life unfolds. Further, the results suggests that to learn
more about how people develop their identities we need to combine and evaluate
different theoretical approaches and research methods, and keep an open mind
regarding what people tell us about their experiences.
