Title: Being me in Canada: Multidimensional identity and belonging of Russian-speaking immigrant youths
Authors: Jenny Glozman
ID: openalex.W2522842831
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10214/9256

Although recent attention has focused on the experiences of immigrants in
Canada, few researchers have explored the experiences of invisible immigrants,
and Russian-speaking immigrants in particular, whose invisible nature may impact
their identity and sense of belonging following their arrival in Canada.
Specifically, they may not necessarily integrate with white mainstream
Canadians, but they may also not fit in with their visible minority immigrant
peers. Moreover, Russian-speaking immigrants often take an indirect path to
Canada which may, in turn, have unique contributions to their acculturation
experiences which may fit outside of current bicultural models of acculturation.
The current study’s focus on immigrant youths is due to the developmental
importance of identity and belonging during this time period. Moreover, the role
of context in identity and sense of belonging, including peers and politics,
will be explored as both factors have been overlooked in past research. Using
constructivist grounded theory methodology, semi-structured interviews were
conducted with 24 decimal- and second-generation Russian-speaking immigrant
youths (15 to 19 years of age). A substantive theory of the identity and
belonging of these youths was developed. Results indicated that the processes
youths engaged in were multidirectional, flexible, and dynamic. At the core of
the framework were three processes: choosing identities, expressing identities,
and fitting in. The results of identity and belonging were often
multidimensional, with youths choosing from and expressing more than one
identity, and experiencing a sense of belonging with one or more groups. In
order to facilitate these processes, youths navigated their context, with a
particular focus on family, peers, community, politics, and immigration
experiences. The youths’ experiences in navigating the context were both
positive and negative which had an impact on their consequent identity and
belonging. This study was one of first to consider the multidimensional nature
of identity and belonging among immigrant youths, accounting for factors such as
invisibility, indirect migration, and religious/cultural minority identities.
Moreover, this study explored overlooked contextual factors such as peer group
experiences (positive and negative, in-school and out of school, in-group and
out-group) and the political context (multiculturalism and political conflict).
Implications for research and practice are discussed.
