Title: In their own words: abused children's perceptions of care provided by their birth parents and foster carers
Authors: Kamran Ahmed, Laurie Windsor, Stephen Scott
ID: openalex.W1989038430
URL: https://doi.org/10.1177/0308575914565068

There are many theories as to what form good-quality parenting should take.
Attachment theory emphasises providing a secure base through sensitive
responding at times of emotional need. Social learning theory outlines the need
for firm limits in addition to the promotion of positive interchanges. These
theories are supported by numerous quantitative research studies investigating
which parenting styles are associated with better outcomes for children in
general and for those with additional needs due to prior abuse or emotional and
behavioural difficulties. However, there have been few systematic qualitative
studies asking children themselves about their care experiences, particularly
with abused or neglected children who are now safe in foster care. Using an
adapted version of the Child Attachment Interview, we interviewed 12 children
aged 13 to 15 years, who had been taken into care due to abuse and fostered for
at least six months, with the aim of exploring their attachment to their birth
parents, foster carers and attitudes to different parenting styles in general.
Transcripts were analysed using the qualitative technique of Interpretative
Phenomenological Analysis. Overall, the abused children spoke more positively of
foster care than the care provided by their birth parents. Parenting techniques
mentioned in positive terms were a clear disciplinary style, setting firm
boundaries, nurturing care, enjoyable time together and mentoring further
development. Negative themes included angry or inconsistent disciplinary styles,
failure to set appropriate boundaries, rejecting and neglectful behaviour, a
lack of joint activities, a chaotic lifestyle and parental illness. This study
provides a unique perspective on parenting, as the children studied have
experienced both poor parenting and reasonably normal care. The findings are
applicable to care provided for fostered children and could be relevant to the
upbringing of children in general.
