Title: International education policy: Its influence on the conception of VET and the VET system in Germany
Authors: Thomas Deißinger
ID: openalex.W2468989415
URL: https://doi.org/10.1177/1745499915613248

Inquiries into vocational education and training (VET) systems are normally
characterised by looking at institutions and steering mechanisms. That aside,
however, it is culture which underlies both the practice and the theory as well
as the policy of VET in various countries. Specific problems arise when it comes
to harmonising VET systems through the backdoor. One of the current
supranational instruments in this context is the European qualifications
framework (EQF) and other related instruments as well as OECD expectations
referring to increasing the numbers of higher education graduates. The PISA
studies certainly also play their part within these influential streams of
international education policy, in so far as they put pressure on school systems
to change, depending on the performance of students. The PISA findings are then
generalised by rebuking whole education systems as well as pointing to best
practice countries like Finland. In contrast to PISA, though, the EQF is not as
well-known an instrument outside the world of education, although its long-term
impact should not be underestimated as it could result in specific national
reform steps beyond the issue of raising the quality of school education. In
this respect, its implications may be compared to those deriving from OECD
studies rebuking countries once they fail to increase progression to and
participation in higher education, since this issue touches the basic
architecture of the whole education system and its underlying cultural and
pedagogical paradigms. Since Germany is a typical example of an ‘apprenticeship
country’, the paper picks up these immanent matching problems by referring to
the German institutional framework of VET, including forms and practices of non-
state intervention into the system and, in particular, to the responsibility of
non-state institutions such as the social partners, who have specific views on
preserving the culture behind the dual system in the context of
internationalisation. The paper also touches on other specific issues associated
with Europeanisation of VET, i.e. the function of hybrid qualifications, which
are quite common in the UK or France, but also in Switzerland with its
traditional apprenticeship system. They refer to the dimension of lifelong
learning policy in so far as they touch the relationship between VET and higher
education, but also the basic question of new progression routes within the
education system.
