Title: Racial identity as narrated by young South African adults with parents from different racial and national heritages
Authors: Wendy M. Carvalho-Malekane
ID: openalex.W1146336158
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/2263/45886

Against a burgeoning worldwide discourse on how individuals from interracial
parentage construct an identity in racialised societies, I conducted a study to
explore and describe the way in which young biracial adults construct and
negotiate their identities in post-apartheid South Africa. The study was
informed by a qualitative and narrative research design within a postcolonial
feminist paradigm. Theoretically, the study is informed by both Root’s
ecological framework of multiracial identity and Gaventa’s power-cube
theory.&#13;\nI purposefully selected young biracial adults (n=10, 5 males, 5
females) adhering to specific age criteria (18 to 25) who are first-generation
offspring from interracial relationships. For snowball sampling, I used social
networks such as Facebook and twitter, as well as word of mouth, to locate
participants. Written narratives and narrative interviews (audio recorded and
transcribed verbatim) served as data sources and were supplemented by researcher
field notes.&#13;\nBy means of inductive thematic analysis, the following four
themes emerged: the influence of family on biracial identity construction;
participants negotiating an identity within social milieus and relationships;
expressions of multiple identities in the construction of biracial identity; and
the stigma, discrimination, stereotyping and dominant discourses associated with
biracial identity construction.&#13;\nThe identity construction of the young
biracial South Africans in this study did not follow a clear linear progression,
but changed and evolved in the participants’ life course. This concurs with
findings in existing literature. Racial identities included predominantly a
white identity during the earlier years, followed by a progressively more black
identity, and a biracial identity in later years. As also seen in other studies,
the young biracial South African adults opted for non-racial qualifiers of
identity, including cultural, religious and national identities. They said that
their parents had been influential in their choice to identify with their
biracial identity/heritage, which was in line with the findings of other
studies. However, contradictory to what was found in other studies, the young
biracial South African adults in this study did not experience rejection from
both black and white peer groups and identified with peers from various racial
groups.&#13;\nThe young biracial adults purposefully constructed identities that
allowed them to experience power and privilege, as opposed to oppression. This
also entailed the young adults’ voicing their preferred choice of identity in a
post-apartheid South African society, thus moving away from the prescribed
racial categories by choosing new racial identities, such as biracial and mixed-
race identities. I posit that constructive identity manipulation appropriation
explains how South African young biracial adults may construct their identities
in post-apartheid South Africa.
