Title: Implementing and Evaluating E2LSH on Storage
Authors: Yu Nakanishi, Kazuhiro Hiwada, Yosuke Bando, Tomoya Suzuki, Hirotsugu Kajihara et al. (+3)
ID: 2403.16404
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.16404

Locality sensitive hashing (LSH) is one of the widely-used approaches to
approximate nearest neighbor search (ANNS) in high-dimensional spaces. The first
work on LSH for the Euclidean distance, E2LSH, showed how ANNS can be solved
efficiently at a sublinear query time in the database size with theoretically-
guaranteed accuracy, although it required a large hash index size. Since then,
several LSH variants having much smaller index sizes have been proposed. Their
query time is linear or superlinear, but they have been shown to run effectively
faster because they require fewer I/Os when the index is stored on hard disk
drives and because they also permit in-memory execution with modern DRAM
capacity.   In this paper, we show that E2LSH is regaining the advantage in
query speed with the advent of modern flash storage devices such as solid-state
drives (SSDs). We evaluate E2LSH on a modern single-node computing environment
and analyze its computational cost and I/O cost, from which we derive storage
performance requirements for its external memory execution. Our analysis
indicates that E2LSH on a single consumer-grade SSD can run faster than the
state-of-the-art small-index methods executed in-memory. It also indicates that
E2LSH with emerging high-performance storage devices and interfaces can approach
in-memory E2LSH speeds. We implement a simple adaptation of E2LSH to external
memory, E2LSH-on-Storage (E2LSHoS), and evaluate it for practical large datasets
of up to one billion objects using different combinations of modern storage
devices and interfaces. We demonstrate that our E2LSHoS implementation runs much
faster than small-index methods and can approach in-memory E2LSH speeds, and
also that its query time scales sublinearly with the database size beyond the
index size limit of in-memory E2LSH.
