Title: Generative AI in Color-Changing Systems: Re-Programmable 3D Object Textures with Material and Design Constraints
Authors: Yunyi Zhu, Faraz Faruqi, Stefanie Mueller
ID: 2404.17028
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.17028

Advances in Generative AI tools have allowed designers to manipulate existing 3D
models using text or image-based prompts, enabling creators to explore different
design goals. Photochromic color-changing systems, on the other hand, allow for
the reprogramming of surface texture of 3D models, enabling easy customization
of physical objects and opening up the possibility of using object surfaces for
data display. However, existing photochromic systems require the user to
manually design the desired texture, inspect the simulation of the pattern on
the object, and verify the efficacy of the generated pattern. These manual
design, inspection, and verification steps prevent the user from efficiently
exploring the design space of possible patterns. Thus, by designing an automated
workflow desired for an end-to-end texture application process, we can allow
rapid iteration on different practicable patterns.   In this workshop paper, we
discuss the possibilities of extending generative AI systems, with material and
design constraints for reprogrammable surfaces with photochromic materials. By
constraining generative AI systems to colors and materials possible to be
physically realized with photochromic dyes, we can create tools that would allow
users to explore different viable patterns, with text and image-based prompts.
We identify two focus areas in this topic: photochromic material constraints and
design constraints for data-encoded textures. We highlight the current
limitations of using generative AI tools to create viable textures using
photochromic material. Finally, we present possible approaches to augment
generative AI methods to take into account the photochromic material
constraints, allowing for the creation of viable photochromic textures rapidly
and easily.
