Title: Large Language Model Agent for Fake News Detection
Authors: Xinyi Li, Yongfeng Zhang, Edward C. Malthouse
ID: 2405.01593
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.01593

Abstract:
In the current digital era, the rapid spread of misinformation on online
platforms presents significant challenges to societal well-being, public trust,
and democratic processes, influencing critical decision making and public
opinion. To address these challenges, there is a growing need for automated fake
news detection mechanisms. Pre-trained large language models (LLMs) have
demonstrated exceptional capabilities across various natural language processing
(NLP) tasks, prompting exploration into their potential for verifying news
claims. Instead of employing LLMs in a non-agentic way, where LLMs generate
responses based on direct prompts in a single shot, our work introduces
FactAgent, an agentic approach of utilizing LLMs for fake news detection.
FactAgent enables LLMs to emulate human expert behavior in verifying news claims
without any model training, following a structured workflow. This workflow
breaks down the complex task of news veracity checking into multiple sub-steps,
where LLMs complete simple tasks using their internal knowledge or external
tools. At the final step of the workflow, LLMs integrate all findings throughout
the workflow to determine the news claim's veracity. Compared to manual human
verification, FactAgent offers enhanced efficiency. Experimental studies
demonstrate the effectiveness of FactAgent in verifying claims without the need
for any training process. Moreover, FactAgent provides transparent explanations
at each step of the workflow and during final decision-making, offering insights
into the reasoning process of fake news detection for end users. FactAgent is
highly adaptable, allowing for straightforward updates to its tools that LLMs
can leverage within the workflow, as well as updates to the workflow itself
using domain knowledge. This adaptability enables FactAgent's application to
news verification across various domains.
