Title: The Widening Gap: The Benefits and Harms of Generative AI for Novice Programmers
Authors: James Prather, Brent Reeves, Juho Leinonen, Stephen MacNeil, Arisoa S. Randrianasolo et al. (+4)
ID: 2405.17739
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.17739

Novice programmers often struggle through programming problem solving due to a
lack of metacognitive awareness and strategies. Previous research has shown that
novices can encounter multiple metacognitive difficulties while programming.
Novices are typically unaware of how these difficulties are hindering their
progress. Meanwhile, many novices are now programming with generative AI
(GenAI), which can provide complete solutions to most introductory programming
problems, code suggestions, hints for next steps when stuck, and explain cryptic
error messages. Its impact on novice metacognition has only started to be
explored. Here we replicate a previous study that examined novice programming
problem solving behavior and extend it by incorporating GenAI tools. Through 21
lab sessions consisting of participant observation, interview, and eye tracking,
we explore how novices are coding with GenAI tools. Although 20 of 21 students
completed the assigned programming problem, our findings show an unfortunate
divide in the use of GenAI tools between students who accelerated and students
who struggled. Students who accelerated were able to use GenAI to create code
they already intended to make and were able to ignore unhelpful or incorrect
inline code suggestions. But for students who struggled, our findings indicate
that previously known metacognitive difficulties persist, and that GenAI
unfortunately can compound them and even introduce new metacognitive
difficulties. Furthermore, struggling students often expressed cognitive
dissonance about their problem solving ability, thought they performed better
than they did, and finished with an illusion of competence. Based on our
observations from both groups, we propose ways to scaffold the novice GenAI
experience and make suggestions for future work.
