Title: Spatial Reasoning and Planning for Deep Embodied Agents
Authors: Shu Ishida
ID: 2409.19479
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.19479

Abstract:
Humans can perform complex tasks with long-term objectives by planning,
reasoning, and forecasting outcomes of actions. For embodied agents to achieve
similar capabilities, they must gain knowledge of the environment transferable
to novel scenarios with a limited budget of additional trial and error.
Learning-based approaches, such as deep RL, can discover and take advantage of
inherent regularities and characteristics of the application domain from data,
and continuously improve their performances, however at a cost of large amounts
of training data. This thesis explores the development of data-driven techniques
for spatial reasoning and planning tasks, focusing on enhancing learning
efficiency, interpretability, and transferability across novel scenarios. Four
key contributions are made. 1) CALVIN, a differential planner that learns
interpretable models of the world for long-term planning. It successfully
navigated partially observable 3D environments, such as mazes and indoor rooms,
by learning the rewards and state transitions from expert demonstrations. 2)
SOAP, an RL algorithm that discovers options unsupervised for long-horizon
tasks. Options segment a task into subtasks and enable consistent execution of
the subtask. SOAP showed robust performances on history-conditional corridor
tasks as well as classical benchmarks such as Atari. 3) LangProp, a code
optimisation framework using LLMs to solve embodied agent problems that require
reasoning by treating code as learnable policies. The framework successfully
generated interpretable code with comparable or superior performance to
human-written experts in the CARLA autonomous driving benchmark. 4) Voggite, an
embodied agent with a vision-to-action transformer backend that solves complex
tasks in Minecraft. It achieved third place in the MineRL BASALT Competition by
identifying action triggers to segment tasks into multiple stages.
