Title: Transparency evaluation for the Kinematic Design of the Harnesses through Human-Exoskeleton Interaction Modeling
Authors: Riccardo Bezzini, Carlo Alberto Avizzano, Francesco Porcini, Alessandro Filippeschi
ID: 2409.18755
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.18755

Lower Limb Exoskeletons (LLEs) are wearable robots that provide mechanical power
to the user. Human-exoskeleton (HE) connections must preserve the user's natural
behavior during the interaction, avoiding undesired forces. Therefore, numerous
works focus on their minimization. Given the inherent complications of
repeatedly prototyping and experimentally testing a device, modeling the
exoskeleton and its physical interaction with the user emerges as a valuable
approach for assessing the design effects. This paper proposes a novel method to
compare different exoskeleton configurations with a flexible simulation tool.
This approach contemplates simulating the dynamics of the device, including its
interaction with the wearer, to evaluate multiple connection mechanism designs
along with the kinematics and actuation of the LLE. This evaluation is based on
the minimization of the interaction wrenches through an optimization process
that includes the impedance parameters at the interfaces as optimization
variables and the similarity of the LLE's joint variables trajectories with the
motion of the wearer's articulations. Exploratory tests are conducted using the
Wearable Walker LLE in different configurations and measuring the interaction
forces. Experimental data are then compared to the optimization outcomes,
proving that the proposed method provides contact wrench estimations consistent
with the collected measurements and previous outcomes from the literature.
Copyright 2024 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from
IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional
purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers
or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
