Title: LLM-Agent-UMF: LLM-based Agent Unified Modeling Framework for Seamless Design of Multi Active/Passive Core-Agent Architectures
Authors: Amine Ben Hassouna, Hana Chaari, Ines Belhaj
ID: 2409.11393
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.11393

Abstract:
In an era where vast amounts of data are collected and processed from diverse
sources, there is a growing demand for sophisticated AI systems capable of
intelligently fusing and analyzing this information. To address these
challenges, researchers have turned towards integrating tools into LLM-powered
agents to enhance the overall information fusion process. However, the
conjunction of these technologies and the proposed enhancements in several
state-of-the-art works followed a non-unified software architecture, resulting
in a lack of modularity and terminological inconsistencies among researchers. To
address these issues, we propose a novel LLM-based Agent Unified Modeling
Framework (LLM-Agent-UMF) that establishes a clear foundation for agent
development from both functional and software architectural perspectives,
developed and evaluated using the Architecture Tradeoff and Risk Analysis
Framework (ATRAF). Our framework clearly distinguishes between the different
components of an LLM-based agent, setting LLMs and tools apart from a new
element, the core-agent, which plays the role of central coordinator. This
pivotal entity comprises five modules: planning, memory, profile, action, and
security -- the latter often neglected in previous works. By classifying
core-agents into passive and active types based on their authoritative natures,
we propose various multi-core agent architectures that combine unique
characteristics of distinctive agents to tackle complex tasks more efficiently.
We evaluate our framework by applying it to thirteen state-of-the-art agents,
thereby demonstrating its alignment with their functionalities and clarifying
overlooked architectural aspects. Moreover, we thoroughly assess five
architecture variants of our framework by designing new agent architectures that
combine characteristics of state-of-the-art agents to address specific goals.
...
