Title: DocETL: Agentic Query Rewriting and Evaluation for Complex Document Processing
Authors: Shreya Shankar, Tristan Chambers, Tarak Shah, Aditya G. Parameswaran, Eugene Wu
ID: 2410.12189
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.12189

Analyzing unstructured data has been a persistent challenge in data processing.
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown promise in this regard, leading to
recent proposals for declarative frameworks for LLM-powered processing of
unstructured data. However, these frameworks focus on reducing cost when
executing user-specified operations using LLMs, rather than improving accuracy,
executing most operations as-is (in a single LLM call). This is problematic for
complex tasks and data, where LLM outputs for user-defined operations are often
inaccurate, even with optimized prompts. For example, an LLM may struggle to
identify {\em all} instances of specific clauses, like force majeure or
indemnification, in lengthy legal documents, requiring decomposition of the
data, the task, or both.   We present DocETL, a system that optimizes complex
document processing pipelines, while accounting for LLM shortcomings. DocETL
offers a declarative interface for users to define such pipelines and uses an
agent-based approach to automatically optimize them, leveraging novel agent-
based rewrites (that we call rewrite directives), as well as an optimization and
evaluation framework. We introduce (i) logical rewriting of pipelines, tailored
for LLM-based tasks, (ii) an agent-guided plan evaluation mechanism that
synthesizes and orchestrates task-specific validation prompts, and (iii) an
optimization algorithm that efficiently finds promising plans, considering the
latencies of agent-based plan generation and evaluation. Our evaluation on four
different unstructured document analysis tasks demonstrates that DocETL finds
plans with outputs that are 25 to 80% more accurate than well-engineered
baselines, addressing a critical gap in unstructured data analysis. DocETL is
open-source at docetl.org, and as of March 2025, has amassed over 1.7k GitHub
Stars, with users spanning a variety of domains.
