Title: Students' Perceptions and Use of Generative AI Tools for Programming Across Different Computing Courses
Authors: Hieke Keuning, Isaac Alpizar-Chacon, Ioanna Lykourentzou, Lauren Beehler, Christian Köppe et al.
ID: 2410.06865
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.06865

Abstract:
Investigation of students' perceptions and opinions on the use of generative
artificial intelligence (GenAI) in education is a topic gaining much interest.
Studies addressing this are typically conducted with large heterogeneous groups,
at one moment in time. However, how students perceive and use GenAI tools can
potentially depend on many factors, including their background knowledge,
familiarity with the tools, and the learning goals and policies of the courses
they are taking. In this study we explore how students following computing
courses use GenAI for programming-related tasks across different programs and
courses: Bachelor and Master, in courses in which learning programming is the
learning goal, courses that require programming as a means to achieve another
goal, and in courses in which programming is optional, but can be useful. We are
also interested in changes over time, since GenAI capabilities are changing at a
fast pace, and users are adopting GenAI increasingly. We conducted three
consecutive surveys (fall `23, winter `23, and spring `24) among students of all
computing programs of a large European research university. We asked questions
on the use in education, ethics, and job prospects, and we included specific
questions on the (dis)allowed use of GenAI tools in the courses they were taking
at the time. We received 264 responses, which we quantitatively and
qualitatively analyzed, to find out how students have employed GenAI tools
across 59 different computing courses, and whether the opinion of an average
student about these tools evolves over time. Our study contributes to the
emerging discussion of how to differentiate GenAI use across different courses,
and how to align its use with the learning goals of a computing course.
