Title: Howzat? Appealing to Expert Judgement for Evaluating Human and AI Next-Step Hints for Novice Programmers
Authors: Neil C. C. Brown, Pierre Weill-Tessier, Juho Leinonen, Paul Denny, Michael Kölling
ID: 2411.18151
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.18151

Motivation: Students learning to program often reach states where they are stuck
and can make no forward progress. An automatically generated next-step hint can
help them make forward progress and support their learning. It is important to
know what makes a good hint or a bad hint, and how to generate good hints
automatically in novice programming tools, for example using Large Language
Models (LLMs).   Method and participants: We recruited 44 Java educators from
around the world to participate in an online study. We used a set of real
student code states as hint-generation scenarios. Participants used a technique
known as comparative judgement to rank a set of candidate next-step Java hints,
which were generated by Large Language Models (LLMs) and by five human
experienced educators. Participants ranked the hints without being told how they
were generated.   Findings: We found that LLMs had considerable variation in
generating high quality next-step hints for programming novices, with GPT-4
outperforming other models tested. When used with a well-designed prompt, GPT-4
outperformed human experts in generating pedagogically valuable hints. A multi-
stage prompt was the most effective LLM prompt. We found that the two most
important factors of a good hint were length (80--160 words being best), and
reading level (US grade 9 or below being best). Offering alternative approaches
to solving the problem was considered bad, and we found no effect of sentiment.
Conclusions: Automatic generation of these hints is immediately viable, given
that LLMs outperformed humans -- even when the students' task is unknown. The
fact that only the best prompts achieve this outcome suggests that students on
their own are unlikely to be able to produce the same benefit. The prompting
task, therefore, should be embedded in an expert-designed tool.
