Title: Interacting Large Language Model Agents. Interpretable Models and Social Learning
Authors: Adit Jain, Vikram Krishnamurthy
ID: 2411.01271
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.01271

Abstract:
This paper discusses the theory and algorithms for interacting large language
model agents (LLMAs) using methods from statistical signal processing and
microeconomics. While both fields are mature, their application to
decision-making involving interacting LLMAs remains unexplored. Motivated by
Bayesian sentiment analysis on online platforms, we construct interpretable
models and algorithms that enable LLMAs to interact and perform Bayesian
inference. Because interacting LLMAs learn from both prior decisions and
external inputs, they can exhibit bias and herding behavior. Thus, developing
interpretable models and stochastic control algorithms is essential to
understand and mitigate these behaviors. This paper has three main results.
First, we show using Bayesian revealed preferences from microeconomics that an
individual LLMA satisfies the necessary and sufficient conditions for rationally
inattentive (bounded rationality) Bayesian utility maximization and, given an
observation, the LLMA chooses an action that maximizes a regularized utility.
Second, we utilize Bayesian social learning to construct interpretable models
for LLMAs that interact sequentially with each other and the environment while
performing Bayesian inference. Our proposed models capture the herding behavior
exhibited by interacting LLMAs. Third, we propose a stochastic control framework
to delay herding and improve state estimation accuracy under 2 settings: (a)
centrally controlled LLMAs (b) autonomous LLMAs with incentives. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our methods on real datasets for hate speech classification
and product quality assessment, using open-source models like LLaMA and
closed-source models like ChatGPT. The main takeaway of this paper, based on
empirical analysis and mathematical formalism, is that LLMAs act as rationally
bounded Bayesian agents that exhibit social learning when interacting.
