Title: Evaluation of the UK Household Support Fund in a case study organisation using a novel machine learning methodology
Authors: None
ID: socarxiv.cqmjx_v1
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/socarxiv.cqmjx_v1

Food insecurity (FI) may be a powerful stressor that impacts on children’s
development. Yet the parent-child pathway through which these effects are
mediated remains unclear, which may limit the effectiveness of support programs,
such as the Household Support Fund, in mitigating the impact of the cost-of-
living crisis on FI. A mixed methods approach was used with a novel machine
learning  algorithm to identify  attributes and affects characterising food
insecurity.  It was found that parents may experience food insecurity as pain,
which they cope with by numbing. This may have several negative consequences: 1)
it attenuated parents own pleasure and contentment reducing wellbeing; 2)
reduced parents awareness of indicators of food insecurity of their children,
risking unintentional transmission of food insecurity, and 3) potentially
increased susceptibility to and hindered recovery from neuropathological
conditions such as anxiety, depression and PTSD. Transmission of FI from parent
to children occurred in 18% of households, which were characterised by larger
family size and reduced propensity for parents to seek support. Parents used a
range of buffering strategies focused on self-sacrifice, which are encoded as
part of household culture, which children may learn vicariously in a way that is
inextricable from their parent’s emotion-spatial hermeneutic. HSF reduced both
negative affect of parents and influenced the transmission of Fi from parent to
child. A model of FI is presented where parents foster coping mechanisms amongst
their children as they transmit FI, usually when their own buffering capacity is
exhausted but also as a conditioning mechanism. However, these coping mechanisms
reduce parent wellbeing and risk seeding mental health challenges in their
children. Co-created HSF type support should therefore be coupled with wider
support to encourage parent self care.
