Title: Demand-responsive research support to the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office during the 2023 Nigerian elections: an evaluation using outcome harvesting
Authors: None
ID: socarxiv.8wze7_v1
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/socarxiv.8wze7_v1

Background: Various parts of the public sector in the UK and elsewhere benefit
from access to demand-responsive research services designed to aid decision-
making. Before and during the Nigerian elections in 2023, staff at the UK’s
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) received such support. This
was designed to help staff navigate a wide range of fast-moving issues and
unprecedent events surrounding the election, such as disruption of traditional
election dynamics. Objectives: This evaluation aims to identify the outcomes of
demand-responsive research support prior to and during the 2023 elections. It
explores the sustainability of identified outcomes as well as the factors that
enabled or constrained effectiveness. Methods: This evaluation uses an adapted
outcome harvesting approach. Key project documents are reviewed, and semi-
structured interviews are conducted with nine project stakeholders. Interviewed
stakeholders include both users of the research and stakeholders who contributed
to the design or delivery of the intervention. An analytical framework grounded
in behavioural science is used to organise findings. Results: The study
identifies several instances in which the research informed FCDO thinking and
decision-making around the elections, including in areas such as communications
and security planning. The research team’s responsiveness, their expertise and
perceived independence enabled positive outcomes. Regular engagement between
research producers and research users was another important enabler. Outcomes
were largely short-term, however, and effects may have been greater had support
been provided earlier in FCDO’s planning processes. Conclusions: The evaluation
suggests that demand-responsive research can inform public sector decision-
making even in fast-moving contexts. Sustained changes in research use are only
likely to occur when explicitly targeted by the intervention. The depth and
diversity of research teams’ expertise, their willingness to engage in genuine
co-design and discussion with research users and the timeliness of outputs are
important moderators of effectiveness.
