Title: Learning in and through the Arts: The Question of Transfer
Authors: Judith M. Burton, Robert Horowitz, Hal Abeles
ID: openalex.W2119313428
URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/00393541.2000.11651679

The Issue of Transfer The issue of transfer from the arts to other subject
disciplines has almost become a leitmotif of arts education - unhappily it has
almost come to define what we do! Perhaps because the arts have lost ground in
recent years, it has become almost axiomatic to claim their importance in
learning to read, write and compute, or in learning other subjects. Advocates
have been anxious to demonstrate that experiences in the arts can advance the
general education of K-12 pupils, in particular through the development of
higher order thinking skills. As our research team read through the accumulated
literature we began to see that the value laden and somewhat strident claims
often skewed research endeavors by coloring them with the needs of advocacy. Put
directly, most studies of transfer in the 1980s and 1990s have been framed by a
unidirectional and linear model of learning in which certain capacities in the
arts are thought to to other subject disciplines and to be causal in supporting
enhanced Despite its attractiveness, there are two major problems with this as a
theoretical model of First, together with Gardner's (1983) more situated theory
of multiple intelligences, neuroscience has given us a broader picture of the
human mind actively creating connections and associations across a broad front
of stimuli - or across intelligences. Thus, there is no reason to believe that
learning from other subject disciplines does not in some fashion also travel
back to enhance arts learning. Second, capacities usually identified as
engendered in arts learning, such as creativity, imagination, critical and
divergent thinking, are also dimensions that are widely held to characterize
thinking in other subject domains (Burton, 1995; Gardner 1983; Greene, 1995;
Perkins, 1987). In other words, perceptions of transfer may well be, in part, a
function of the degree to which different disciplines share certain cognitive
elements, dispositions, or ways of thinking. Given this, one can hardly argue
that the acquisition of such capacities in the arts are causal to their
emergence or enhancement in other disciplines. A Taxonomy of Effects However,
while unidirectional causality may be a disputable claim, this hardly rules out
the existence of some sort of effect implicating arts learning in learning in
other subject domains! Thus, transfer, if and where it exists, may be part of a
larger constellation of impacts of arts learning on other subjects. Indeed,
while there have been some dramatic failures to find what has been defined as
transfer, there also have been some dramatic successes (Catterall, 1998; Dorn,
1994). Here, a long list of arts learning items have been introduced into the
literature, which have been seen to boost, illuminate, or enhance learning in
other domains (Catterall, 1998). For example, a list of cognitive capacities,
dispositions, and attitudes that have been found to be implicated in arts
learning-across visual arts, music, dance, and drama-include creativity,
imagination, and the ability to think critically. Indeed imaginative, critical,
and creative thinking have also been found to implicate other capacities such as
the ability to centralize energy, focus perception, engage in reflection, show
Flexibility by changing directions, explore new possibilities, and elaborate on
ideas (Catterall, 1998, Eisner, 1998; Getzels and Csikszentmihalyi, 1976).
Beyond creativity and imagination, other kinds of meta-cognitive thinking have
been implicated in the arts, involving the ability to: integrate divergent
points of view, layer relationships, and construct unified wholes -in other
words, construct coherence among relationships within complex forms-as in
paintings, musical compositions, choreography, or poems (Eisner, 1998; Perkins,
1994). Looked at from the other direction, a steady stream of studies carried
out over the past decade have found gains in writing, reading and reading
comprehension, and verbal expression among elementary age children following
creative and appreciative experiences in visual arts and music (Catterall, 1998;
Luftig, 1994; Moore and Caldwell, 1993; Redfield, 1990). …
