Title: Teacher Learning: Documentation, Collaboration, and Reflection
Authors: Will Parnell
ID: openalex.W18432427
URL: https://doi.org/10.15760/etd.743

Inspired by the Municipal preprimary schools of Reggio Emilia, Italy, two art
studio teachers and a researcher have explored experiences and meaning in the
atelier. When studio teachers document children's thinking through digital
photographs. transcribed audio tapes, quotations of a child's verbal thoughts,
and copies of their work, an indescribable moment in teacher thinking
interweaves with the child's learning, As teachers capture children's
representations, investigate, interpret, and share their ideas with colleagues
and community-an underlying question emerges. What are studio teachers'
experiences o/teaching-learning in the atelier as they utilize documentation,
collaboration, and reflection as a way to inform their practices? From this
question, reader and researcher start a journey together into a six-month
phenomenological study of studio teaching experiences. As a core member in the
teaching team, the studio teacher resides in the atelier to bring teaching and
learning together in a profound way, to bridge classroom experiences with
representative arts, and to facilitate the community's learning about teaching-
learning. The methods used to inform this study include observations, in-depth
interviews, electronic journaling, description, photos, and interpretation of
studio work. Overall, this study's methods inform the phenomenological research
and construct an in-depth look at experiences in the artist's studio. The
results of this research are retold through narratives focusing on experiences
and meaning-making in the studios. Stories such as living with the cracked egg;
isolation in the studio: gifts for others; rough stones polishing one another;
and many others, utilize photographs to enhance meaning through picturesque
artifacts. Essential themes, conclusions, and implications appear in the webbing
of experiences and are explored in the final chapter. The themes include
conceptual frameworks such as life eats entropy, serendipity and synergy and
more. Conclusions are drawn and findings are made connecting studio experiences
to participant voice, disequilibrium, listening, engaging, stepping back, and
slowing time; demonstrating documentation as learning, revisiting,
representation, and manageability; making meaning of collaboration as struggle,
communication, and reconstruction; and reflecting back as purposeful and an act
of teaching-learning. Overall, this research study exposes techniques, ideas,
and wonderings from two studio teachers' and a researcher's experiences in the
atelier.
