Title: Settler Stories
Authors: Nick Caldwell
ID: openalex.W125802712
URL: https://doi.org/10.5204/mcj.1879

The computer game is perhaps the fastest growing and most quickly evolving
cultural leisure technology in the western world. Invented as a form just under
40 years ago with the creation of Space War at MIT, computer and video games
collectively account for hundreds of billions of dollars in sales across the
world. And yet critical analysis of this cultural form is still in its infancy.
Perhaps the sheer speed of the development of games may account for this. Thirty
years ago, strategy games were screens of text instructions and a prompt where
you could type a weather forecast. Today pretty much all games are flawlessly
shaded and rendered polygons. The technology of film has barely changed at all
in the same period. In any case, the critical study of games began in the
eighties. The focus initially was on the psychology of the gamer. Most game
players were children and teenagers during this period, and the focussing of
their leisure time on this new and strange computer technology became a source
of extreme moral panic for educators, parents and researchers alike. Later,
research into the cultures of gaming would become more nuanced, and begin to
detail the semiotics and narrative structures of games. It is in that kind of
frame that this article is positioned. I want to look closely at a particular
strategy game series, The Settlers. Firstly, however, a description of the
strategy game genre. Strategy games put the player into a simulated inhabited
environment and give the player almost total control over that environment and
its simulated inhabitants. The strategy game has many genres, including the
simulation game and the god game, but the sub-genre I will focus on in this
paper is the real-time strategy game. The game requires the player to develop a
functioning economy, geared around the production of weapons and armies, which
are sent out to combat neighbouring tribes or armies. Real-time games typically
give greater tactical control of the armies to the player, and slightly less
detailed economic control. The aim is basically to amass as much gold or
whatever as possible to buy as many troops as possible. However, the game I am
about to discuss is, in addition to being a simple game of war, a very
interesting simulation of economic and logistical constraints. The Settlers is
series of fantasy computer strategy games developed by the German game design
firm Blue Byte. The three extant Settlers games can be considered an evolution
of game design rather than a continuing narrative, so, given the time
constraints, for the purposes of this paper I will address only one game in the
series, the most recently released title, The Settlers 3. The Settlers 3 tells
the story of three expansionist empires, the Romans, the Egyptians, and the
Asians, who have been thrust onto an uninhabited continent by the gods of their
peoples to determine who is the fittest to survive. In other words, the game is
founded from the beginning on a socio-Darwinian premise. In each level of the
game, the settlers of each tribe must, under their player's direction, build an
efficient and well maintained colony with a fully operating economy in order to
achieve a set objective, which is usually to wipe out the opposing tribes by
building up a large army, though it may be also to amass a predetermined level
of a particular resource. Each level begins with about twenty settlers, a small
guard hut to define the limits of the borders and a barely adequate supply of
wooden planks, stone slabs and tools with which to begin to construct the
economy. The player chooses building types from a menu and places them on the
screen. Immediately the appropriate number of settlers walk across the
landscape, leaving visible tracks in their wake, to pick up tools and supplies
in order to construct the building. Typically, the player will order the
construction of a woodcutter's hut, a sawmill, a stone cutter and a forester to
ensure the steady flow of the basic construction materials to the rest of the
colony. From this point more guard huts and towers are constructed to expand
into new territory, and farms are built to feed the miners. Once constructed,
the mine produce coal, gold and ore, which is sent down to the smelters to make
iron bars (to make swords and tools) and gold bars (to pay the troops). Luxuries
such as beer and wine are produced as a sacrifice to the gods. This results in
rewards such as magical spells and promotion of the soldiers. Occasionally,
incursions of enemy troops must be dealt with -- if they take a guard tower in
battle, the borders, represented by lines of coloured flags, shrink, leading to
the collapse and destruction of any building outside the boundaries. Finally,
sufficient swords, bows and spears are produced, the soldiers are promoted, and
they set off to pillage and destroy their neighbours' territory. If the
previously mentioned enemy incursions were frequent enough, the final conflict
where the player's warriors brutally annihilate the enemy is tremendously
satisfying. The problematics of that particular game construct are left as an
exercise for the audience. When territory is taken, the villages of the enemy go
up in smoke and their resources are left lying on the ground, for the settlers
to pick up and use for the benefit of the player. One of the things that make
the game so fascinating to play is the complexity of the simulation. It must be
said right away that the game employs many abstractions to make it playable and
not utterly boring. For instance, only the miners out of all the settlers
actually need food, and the mechanism by which new settlers are actually created
is a bit vague (you construct a building called a "residence", and when it's
completed, new setters simply troop out. And there only seem to be male
settlers, unless you play the Amazons). Nonetheless, the game still quite
explicitly details things most games of its type gloss right over. Unlike most
games, pulling out all the stops in production just leads to bottlenecks where
the transportation infrastructure can't get the goods to their destinations.
Production levels have to be carefully monitored and throttled back where
necessary to ensure the smooth flow of resources from A to B, C and D. Resources
themselves -- coal lumps, gold bricks, fish, loaves of bread, swords --are
modelled individually: you can actually track the process whereby an individual
sheaf of wheat is harvested, picked up by a settler, carried off to the mill,
turned into flour, sent to the bakery, made into a loaf of bread, and delivered
to the coal miner for consumption. With its attention to the gritty detail of
getting stuff from one place to the next, The Settlers is one of the very few
truly logistically precise strategy games. Before I begin the analysis proper, I
want to introduce some key terms that I'll be using a bit idiosyncratically in
this paper. I'll be talking about gameplay quite a bit. Gameplay is a bit of a
sliding signifier in the discourse of gaming theory -- loosely speaking it's
that indefinable something that gets a player heated up about a game and keeps
them playing for days on end. But here I want to be more precise. I'll offer a
strategic definition. Gameplay is a way of quantifying the operations of a kind
of economy of desire that operates between the player and the game itself. This
economy has, as its constitutive elements, such factors as attention span,
pleasure, ratio of novelty to repetition. These elements are in constant
circulation in a game and the resulting economy is responsible for a good deal
of the dynamism of the experience: in other words, the gameplay. What I want to
focus on in this paper is what comes from the precise moment where two, quite
central impulses of gameplay are in perfect balance, just before the first
surrenders its grasp and the second takes over. The first impulse of play
consists of two elements -- the visual presentation of the game, i.e. the pretty
pictures that draw you in, and the narrative pretext of the story, the thing
that gives what you are doing some kind of sense. It is on these two elements
that classical ideological analysis of gameplay is typically founded. For
instance, the archetypal platform game where all the female characters are
helpless maidens who only exist as a way of getting the masculine protagonist
into the action. The second impulse of gameplay is what might be called the
"process", the somewhat under-theorised state where the visual trappings of the
game and the motivating story line have slipped into the background, leaving
only the sense of seamless integration of the player into the game's cybernetic
feedback loop. The visual presentation and narrative pretext of The Settlers
draws the player into a familiar fantasy of pre-modern existence. Presented to
the player is a beautifully rendered virgin wilderness, filled with rolling
hills, magnificent mountain ranges and vast forests, resounding with the sounds
of the stream and brook, and the rustling of the wildlife. Into this wilderness
the player must project an empire. That empire will consist of an elaborately
detailed network (and I use the term deliberately) of cottage industries,
labourers, paths, commodities, resources, defensive structures and places of
worship. Real-world economic activities are consummately simulated as complex
flows of information. The simulation is always fascinating to watch. Each node
in this network, be it a fisherman's hut, a bakery, or a smelter, is exquisitely
rendered, and full of picturesque, yet highly functional, animation. For
instance, the process of a fisherman leaving his hut, going to a stream, setting
his line, and catching a fish is visually expressive and lively, but it also is
a specific bottleneck in the production process -- it takes a finite time,
during which the car
