Title: Effects of Reading Styles on African-American Preschoolers of Disadvantage.
Authors: Elizabeth A. Witt
ID: openalex.W2737076144
URL: https://doi.org/10.31390/gradschool_disstheses.7400

This study investigated the effects of two styles of storybook reading within
the storybook reading event (SBRE) upon African-American preschoolers of
disadvantage (AAP-D). One style, performance-oriented, was thought to be closer
to cultural frameworks familiar for this population. This style was contrasted
with the interactive style familiar to children of middle-class. Each style was
utilized with two groups of five children (ten children per condition) across
three storybooks, which were each read six times. Pre- and posttesting were used
to determine changes in language (semantic and discourse ability, as measured by
retelling), literacy, and world knowledge. A control group of five children
received only pretesting and posttesting and no storybook reading. Weekly probes
further examined retelling changes and response to comprehension questions with
each book, and amount of engagement within the storybook reading event. Analysis
of variance was employed in this quantitative study. Subjects ranged in age from
3 years, 9 months to 4 years, 9 months. Pretest-posttest measures of literacy
knowledge and world knowledge indicated reliably greater gains by the groups
receiving storybook reading as compared to the control group. Differences
approached significance for story retelling between experimental and control
groups. Means for the interactive condition were slightly higher than for
performance-oriented on all measures, but both conditions resulted in
improvements in retelling, literacy, and world knowledge. These results suggest
that even short-term experiences with book reading are beneficial to a range of
language and literacy skills for AAP-D children. Weekly probes of retelling,
comprehension, and focused engagement suggested that SBRE benefit in these areas
may be affected by the structure and contents of chosen books as well as the
style of engagement. Important implications of this study are that both styles
of reading appear to offer benefits to AAP-D, and that style use may need to be
individualized to the age, stage, and book experience of children.
