Title: Gendering the Body: Exploring the Construction of the Sexually Dimorphic Body
Authors: Sarah Lewis
ID: openalex.W73934247
URL: https://doi.org/10.15760/etd.152

Gender is a pervasive and regulating social institution that is operationalized
in mainstream Western culture as a natural extension of the ontological
difference perceived to exist between the binarily sexed bodies of male and
female. Feminist theory has widely established, however, that gender is done -
i.e., gender is not a naturally occurring phenomenon, but is an ongoing
construction engaged and replicated by individual actors and which, while
compulsory, is nevertheless optional. Within this canon is a small number of
feminist theorists, notably Judith Lorber, Judith Bulter, and Nancy Tuana, who
argue that the constructive manifestations of gender performativity (that is,
doing of gender) are not limited to the social sphere. They argue the role of
gender in the construction of the material body, asserting that doing gender has
a constructive role in physical embodiment: what we do influences, and in fact
creates, what our bodies are. This study engages feminist theory on the
production of the body through a qualitative exploration of the lived experience
of gendered bodily change, as described in the first-hand narratives of trans-
identified individuals. I predict that the analysis of the narratives in the
sample will show that in comparison to cisgender individuals, trans individuals
possess a heightened awareness of the performative nature of gender, and that
trans individuals consciously engage performativity in order to conform to the
normative expectations associated with the desired gender role. I further
predict that trans individuals experience sexually dimorphic bodily change to be
a direct result of changes to their gender identity. The interview analysis
findings provide mixed support for the first hypothesis, demonstrating that
while trans individuals in the sample do demonstrate a heightened awareness of
the ways in which gender is performed, the respondents’ insights came largely
from their experiences in their compulsorily cisgender, pre-transition lives,
rather than their current gender embodiments. The concept of performativity and
its perceived implication of artificiality clashed with the respondents’ sense
of their gendered actions as an expression of an authentic self, and my analysis
thus addresses performativity as a necessarily polemic concept located between
the subjectivity of the individual narratives and the theoretical position that
gender is done. The findings provide a substantial level of support for the
second hypothesis that trans individuals understand experienced bodily change to
be a direct result of changes in gender identity. This study’s exploration of
trans experiences of lived bodily change contributes a narrative
