Title: AN ANALYSIS OF COHESION OF EXPOSITION TEXTS: AN INDONESIAN CONTEXT
Authors: Emi Emilia, Nurfitri Habibi, Lungguh Ariang Bangga
ID: openalex.W2787405403
URL: https://doi.org/10.17509/ijal.v7i3.9791

The paper reports on the results of a study aiming to investigate the cohesion
of exposition texts written by eleventh graders of a school in Bandung, West
Java, Indonesia. The study used a qualitative case study research design,
especially text analysis, involving 32 students. In the interest of space, the
paper will present the data obtained from six texts written by 6 students,
representing low, mid, and high achievers. The texts were analyzed using
systemic functional linguistics (SFL), especially in terms of schematic
structure and linguistic features, especially those contributing to the cohesion
of the texts, such as Theme progression and cohesive devices. The results show
that all texts show students’ grasp and understanding of the schematic structure
of an exposition, including thesis, argument, and restatement of the thesis. All
texts also successfully use the zig-zag and the Theme reiteration patterns,
which indicate the students’ emerging capacity to create a text with cohesion at
the clause level. However, only texts written by high achievers employ the
multiple Theme pattern, indicating the students’ emerging capacity to create a
text with better sense of connectedness, unity, and flow of information at the
global level. High achiever texts also employ discourse features which allow the
reader to predict how the text will unfold and guide them to a line of
understanding of a text as a whole. Moreover, in terms of cohesive devices, all
texts use some simple cohesive devices—reference, lexical cohesion, and
conjunction. It should be mentioned that all texts are rudimentary with some
inappropriate word choices and grammatical problems. This suggests that the
students still needed more guidance and time to do research on the topic in
focus, to go through the process of writing as professional do, to allow them to
create a better text with more elaboration and characteristics of written
language with consistency and accuracy. It is recommended that further research
on different perspectives and foci of analysis of different text types using
systemic functional linguistics, with more representative samples, and studies
on the teaching of writing be conducted.
