Title: Effective Educational Strategies to Promote Life-Long Musical Investment: Perceptions of Educators
Authors: Amanda E. Krause, Jane W. Davidson
ID: openalex.W2898550784
URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01977

While research has broadly considered the wide-ranging intellectual, social,
personal, and physical benefits of active musical participation across the
lifespan, there is little research that explores how music educators work to
promote participant investment inside school and beyond. The present research,
therefore, aimed to investigate the practices employed by leading music
educators within a range of cultural and pedagogical contexts that facilitate
investment toward life-long engagement in music. Interviews with North American,
European, and Australian music educators with both practitioner and research
expertise from within school as well as higher education institutions were
undertaken to gather reflections on participants' own practices and beliefs.
Content analysis of the interview transcripts revealed deep knowledge and skills
relating to teaching music, education philosophy and pedagogy, and strong
recognition of the support of peers, supervisors, institution/school, and local
community. It was clear that interviewees were deeply influenced by local,
national, and cultural trends. Further, the advice they offered for
new/beginning music educators was to think beyond the structure of their own
music education and to explore culturally diverse educational experiences for
students. Educational approaches that fostered co-production were favored, thus
guiding students in their pursuits in learner-directed environments. While the
beliefs and practices described are not "new" - echoing well-established
educational philosophies - all interviewees argue for a shift from the
prevailing pedagogical practice based on expertise training to the promotion
cultural connectedness and sharing in and through musical experience. These
findings are discussed in terms of Self-Determination Theory, to provide a
framework for how music educators can facilitate long-term musical investment
through the development of autonomous engagement to generate personal meaning
and value in music, which can translate to deeper, longer musical investment.
Exploring these pedagogical practices and beliefs in terms of Self-Determination
Theory is a significant addition to the literature, enabling the consideration
of the type of motivation required to stimulate and develop long-term interest
in music.
