Title: Toilet training: A Foucauldian discourse analysis
Authors: Rita Robinson
ID: openalex.W2804055922
URL: https://hdl.handle.net/10292/11508

Toilet training is a process in which a child learns to independently manage
their excretory functions in a way that fits with society’s norms. Within my
practice as an occupational therapist I wished to problematise why different
opportunities were enabled for children with impairments particularly around the
opportunity to become toilet trained. As a citizen of Aotearoa New Zealand, I
also wanted to problematise why as a country we have such high child abuse rates
and how this linked to our socially constructed beliefs around body wastes. The
aim of this inquiry was to open up the practices of toilet training to
examination, and to gain an understanding of how everyday practices are
produced, changed and maintained. &#13;\nThe study I outline in this thesis is a
genealogical biopolitical governmental discourse analysis of toilet training in
Aotearoa New Zealand, applying the thinking of Michel Foucault with a
poststructural influence. To do this study I accessed and analysed a wide range
of texts associated with toilet training, including letters and articles from
popular media sources, child development pamphlets, manuals, books, research
articles and governmental reports. The accessed texts focused on three
identified events associated with shifts in toilet training practices. The first
event was the baby boom of the 1950s in response to secure economic times and
post-war wealth. The 1980s event connected to a shift from early childhood care
services moving from the Department of Social Welfare to the Department of
Education and an increase of women in the work force. The last event is located
in current day, particularly in response to increasing numbers of children
attending primary school without being toilet trained and the implementation of
the Vulnerable Children’s Act. The analysis of the texts involved applying
Foucauldian thinking and utilising his notions, principles, rules and tools. The
findings are presented as a series of articles with each addressing an
identified rupture in discourses, thus creating a three-part genealogy of toilet
training practice in Aotearoa New Zealand. Each article has its own
methodological focus suited to the nature of the located rupture. Toilet
Training Discourses in 1950s Aotearoa New Zealand (Robinson, Hocking &amp;
Payne, 2016b) showcased the influence of medical and psychoanalytical discourses
on the everyday practices of mothers and children, while the second article,
“Toilet training practice and subjectivities in 1980s Aotearoa New Zealand”
(Robinson, Hocking &amp; Payne, 2016a) demonstrated how a shift in toilet
training practice was influenced by the contextual situation of neoliberal and
human capital discourses. While “Toilet training in Aotearoa New Zealand: The
use of critical, quality and purchased time” (Robinson, Hocking &amp; Payne, in
press) focused on the transformation of medical, moral and aesthetic discourse
and practices as played out through the disciplining action of time use.
Following each article, a consistent framework of analysis is presented, teasing
out the located episteme, techne and ethos, and a reflective narrative of the
learnings gained. &#13;\nThe outcome of my study is that what constitutes toilet
training is currently constructed by some discourses as a key juncture and a
practice which is orchestrated predominantly by mothers, but facilitated by a
growing number of adults, who socialise children through a continuum of
development from dependence and interdependence to illusionary independence.
This key juncture is seen as a trajectory, one which follows the norm or a
trajectory which may include Othering and difference. I argue that toilet
training practices and associated knowledges have predominantly been produced
from medical discourses, with additional moral and aesthetic discourses and
practices also being located. Current-day toilet training, and therefore
toileting mastery, is intertwined with the concepts of agency, cognitive
ability, ease of mobility and O(o)thering. The criteria of who is O(o)thered
changes depending on the knowledge produced within each specific time period and
has an effect on whether a person is seen as cognitively capable to hold agency.
Othering (with a capital O) connects to medical discourses, lower-case othering
to aesthetics, while agency, ease of mobility and cognitive ability connect to
moral practices and, therefore, produce toilet training as a human rights issue.
&#13;\nToilet training is usually constructed as dominance of the social body
over the instinctual body. This thesis provides space “to think otherwise”, this
being, that the body being toilet trained has the opportunity to shape the
social body. This space “to think otherwise” includes the practice of toilet
training and the practices used by occupational therapists in supporting clients
with toileting challenges. The contribution of this study lies in highlighting
and questioning the taken-for-granted truths which have become embedded within
the discourses and discursive practices of toilet training, enabling an
opportunity “to think otherwise” about the opportunities and dangers which are
currently produced by the competing discourses located.
