Title: Household archetypes and behavioural patterns in UK domestic energy use
Authors: Hui Ben, Koen Steemers
ID: openalex.W2784245036
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12053-017-9609-1

Variations in household behaviour often lead to a mismatch between actual and
estimated energy performance at home. More detailed information on behavioural
variables could help in improving the prediction of energy consumption and
enabling policy interventions responding to different household groups. This
research aims to identify household archetypes and behavioural patterns in order
to allow a targeted approach in energy-saving policy and retrofit improvement.
It employed a statistical approach to cluster households based on empirical data
collected from a household survey in Cambridge, UK. Factor analysis was used to
identify behavioural factors. Based on the commonalities of variables under each
factor, five factors were defined: (1) main space heating, (2) auxiliary space
use, (3) main space use, (4) auxiliary space heating and (5) use of appliances.
Statistical pattern analysis was then applied to develop behavioural patterns.
These patterns were derived based on their factor scores. Finally, non-
parametric correlation analysis was carried out in order to determine the
relationship between behavioural factors and the following: household or
dwelling characteristics, comfort and energy use for creating household
archetypes. After significant correlations were found between behavioural
factors and other variables, five archetypes were identified: (1) active
spenders, (2) conscious occupiers, (3) average users, (4) conservers and (5)
inactive users. Among these archetypes, households with a larger house, higher
energy use and more complex household composition tended to have longer hours of
main space heating, while larger and more complex households tended to use the
main space of their dwellings for longer. Using these archetypes allows for a
better integration of occupant behaviour into the technically oriented
efficiency paradigm. This tailored approach provides a gateway to developing
more effective policies and low energy strategies geared towards specific
households.
