Title: Being Jacob: Young Children, Automedial Subjectivity, and Child Social Media Influencers
Authors: Isabel Pedersen, Kristen Aspevig
ID: openalex.W2800676294
URL: https://doi.org/10.5204/mcj.1352

Introduction Children are not only born digital, they are fashioned toward a
lifestyle that needs them to be digital all the time (Palfrey and Gasser). They
click, tap, save, circulate, download, and upload the texts of their lives,
their friends’ lives, and the anonymous lives of the people that surround them.
They are socialised as Internet consumers ready to participate in digital
services targeted to them as they age such as Snapchat, Instagram, and YouTube.
But they are also fashioned as producers, whereby their lives are sold as
content on these same markets. As commodities, the minutiae of their lives
become the fodder for online circulation. Paradoxically, we also celebrate these
digital behaviours as a means to express identity. Personal profile-building for
adults is considered agency-building (Beer and Burrows), and as a consequence,
we praise children for mimicking these acts of adult lifestyle. This article
reflects on the Kids, Creative Storyworlds, and Wearables project, which
involved an ethnographic study with five young children (ages 4-7), who were
asked to share their autobiographical stories, creative self-narrations, and
predictions about their future mediated lives (Atkins et al.). For this case
study, we focus on commercialised forms of children’s automedia, and we compare
discussions we had with 6-year old Cayden, a child we met in the study who
expresses the desire to make himself famous online, with videos of Jacob, a
child vlogger on YouTube’s Kinder Playtime, who clearly influences children like
Cayden. We argue that child social influencers need consideration both as
autobiographical agents and as child subjects requiring a sheltered approach to
their online lives.Automedia Automedia is an emergent genre of autobiography
(Smith and Watson Reading 190; “Virtually Me” 78). Broadcasting one’s life
online takes many forms (Kennedy “Vulnerability”). Ümit Kennedy argues “Vlogging
on YouTube is a contemporary form of autobiography in which individuals engage
in a process of documenting their life on a daily or weekly basis and, in doing
so, construct[ing] their identity online” (“Exploring”). Sidonie Smith and Julia
Watson write that “visual and digital modes are projecting and circulating not
just new subjects but new notions of subjectivity through the effects of
automediality” with the result that “the archive of the self in time, in space
and in relation expands and is fundamentally reorganized” (Reading 190). Emma
Maguire addresses what online texts “tell us about cultural understandings of
selfhood and what it means to communicate ‘real’ life through media” naming one
tool, “automedia”. Further, Julie Rak calls on scholars “to rethink ‘life’ and
‘writing’ as automedia” to further “characterize the enactment of a personal
life story in a new media environment.” We define automedia as a genre that
involves the practices of creating, performing, sharing, circulating, and (at
times) preserving one’s digital life narrative meant for multiple publics.
Automedia revises identity formation, embodiment, or corporealities in acts of
self-creation (Brophy and Hladki 4). Automedia also emphasizes circulation. As
shared digital life texts now circulate through the behaviours of other human
subjects, and automatically via algorithms in data assemblages, we contend that
automediality currently involves a measure of relinquishing control over
perpetually evolving mediatised environments. One cannot control how a shared
life narrative will meet a public in the future, which is a revised way of
thinking about autobiography. For the sake of this paper, we argue that
children’s automedia ought to be considered a creative, autobiographical act, in
order to afford child authors who create them the consideration they deserve as
agents, now and in the future. Automedial practices often begin when children
receive access to a device. The need for a distraction activity is often the
reason parents hand a young child a smartphone, iPad, or even a wearable camera
(Nansen). Mirroring the lives of parents, children aspire to share
representations of their own personal lives in pursuit of social capital. They
are often encouraged to use technologies and apps as adults do–to track aspects
of self, broadcast life stories and eventually “live share” them—effectively
creating, performing, sharing, and at times, seeking to preserve a public life
narrative. With this practice, society inculcates children into spheres of
device ubiquity, “socializing them to a future digital lifestyle that will
involve always carrying a computer in some form” (Atkins et al. 49).
Consequently, their representations become inculcated in larger media
assemblages. Writing about toddlers, Nansen describes how the “archiving,
circulation and reception of these images speaks to larger assemblages of media
in which software protocols and algorithms are increasingly embedded in and help
to configure everyday life (e.g. Chun; Gillespie), including young children’s
media lives (Ito)” (Nansen). Children, like adult citizens, are increasingly
faced with choices “not structured by their own preferences but by the economic
imperatives of the private corporations that have recently come to dominate the
internet” (Andrejevic). Recent studies have shown that for children and youth in
the digital age, Internet fame, often characterized by brand endorsements, is a
major aspiration (Uhls and Greenfield, 2). However, despite the ambition to
participate as celebrity digital selves, children are also mired in the calls to
shield them from exposure to screens through institutions that label these
activities detrimental. In many countries, digital “protections” are outlined by
privacy commissioners and federal or provincial/state statutes, (e.g. Office of
the Privacy Commissioner of Canada). Consequently, children are often caught in
a paradox that defines them either as literate digital agents able to compose or
participate with their online selves, or as subjectified wards caught up in
commercial practices that exploit their lives for commercial gain.Kids, Creative
Storyworlds and Wearables ProjectBoth academic and popular cultural critics
continually discuss the future but rarely directly engage the people who will be
empowered (or subjugated) by it as young adults in twenty years. To address
children’s lack of agency in these discussions, we launched the Kids, Creative
Storyworlds and Wearables project to bring children into a dialogue about their
own digital futures. Much has been written on childhood agency and participation
in culture and mediated culture from the discipline of sociology (James and
James; Jenks; Jenkins). In previous work, we addressed the perspective of child
autobiographical feature filmmakers to explore issues of creative agency and
consent when adult gatekeepers facilitate children in film production (Pedersen
and Aspevig “My Eyes”; Pedersen and Aspevig “Swept”). Drawing on that previous
work, this project concentrates on children’s automediated lives and the many
unique concerns that materialize with digital identity-building. Children are
categorised as a vulnerable demographic group necessitating special policy and
legislation, but the lives they project as children will eventually become
subsumed in their own adult lives, which will almost certainly be treated and
mediated in a much different manner in the future. We focused on this landscape,
and sought to query the children on their futures, also considering the issues
that arise when adult gatekeepers get involved with child social media
influencers. In the Storyworlds ethnographic study, children were given a
wearable toy, a Vtech smartwatch called Kidizoom, to use over a month’s
timeframe to serve as a focal point for ethnographic conversations. The Kidizoom
watch enables children to take photos and videos, which are uploaded to a web
interface. Before we gave them the tech, we asked them questions about their
lives, including What are machines going to be like in the future? Can you
imagine yourself wearing a certain kind of computer? Can you tell/draw a story
about that? If you could wear a computer that gave you a super power, what would
it be? Can you use your imagination to think of a person in a story who would
use technology? In answering, many of them drew autobiographical drawings of
technical inventions, and cast themselves in the images. We were particularly
struck by the comments made by one participant, Cayden (pseudonym), a 6-year-old
boy, and the stories he told us about himself and his aspirations. He expressed
the desire to host a YouTube channel about his life, his activities, and the
wearable technologies his family already owned (e.g. a GroPro camera) and the
one we gave him, the Kidizoom smartwatch. He talked about how he would be proud
to publically broadcast his own videos on YouTube, and about the role he had
been allowed to play in the making of videos about his life (that were not
broadcast). To contextualize Cayden’s commentary and his automedial aspirations,
we extended our study to explore child social media influencers who broadcast
components of their personal lives for the deliberate purpose of popularity and
the financial gain of their parents.We selected the videos of Jacob, a child
vlogger because we judged them to be representative of the kinds that Cayden
watched. Jacob reviews toys through “unboxing videos,” a genre in which a child
tells an online audience her or his personal experiences using new toys in
regular, short videos on a social media site. Jacob appears on a YouTube channel
called Kinder Playtime, which appears to be a parent-run channel that states
that, “We enjoy doing these things while playing with our kids: Jacob, Emily,
and Chloe” (see Figure 1). In one particular video, Jacob reviews the Kidizoom
watch, serving as a child influencer for the product. By understanding Jacob’s
performance as agent-driven automedi
