Title: A study on displaced identity of the trafficked children in the three selected young adult novels of the 21st century
Authors: Faisal Lafee Alobeytha
ID: openalex.W3196119525
URL: https://etd.uum.edu.my/8435/3/s95104%20references.docx

Child trafficking is a social disease where its preys endure chronic trauma in
which they usually suffer from physical and psychological abuse as well as
death. Despite the substantial number of studies on human trafficking available
on bookshelves, there is no exact literary study that has tackled the issue of
child trafficking separately from human trafficking. This research aims to study
the ecological environment that contributes to the continuous emergence of child
trafficking. It also examines the effects of ecological environment on the
identity of the children in three selected novels: Uzodinma Iweala's Beast of No
Nation, Patricia McCormick's Sold and Kashmira Sheth's Boys without Names.
Bronfenbrenner’s Ecological System Theory (EST) was used as a theoretical
framework for this study. A thematic approach by Braun and Clarke (2006) was
used to analyse these literary texts. The overall findings of this study show
that (i)traffickers always aim to erase the identity of the trafficked children
and replace it with the identity of slaves; (ii) ecological structures have
contributed to the identity development of these trafficked children; (iii) by
recalling the history of the trafficked children, they may recover their
identities and resist the traffickers. This study encourages scholars to extend
their investigations to include novels which were published after 2010. It also
suggests that there is a need to study the identity and self-esteem of
traffickers. Future research is necessary to improve and elaborate on the new
findings. It is important to focus on more new topics on child trafficking such
as child organ trafficking, child drug trafficking and child begging trafficking
in Young Adult Literature or other sorts of literature. It is necessary to study
the identities of the survivals.
