Title: Vulgar Latin as an emergent concept in the Italian Renaissance (1435–1601): its ancient and medieval prehistory and its emergence and development in Renaissance linguistic thought
Authors: Josef Eskhult
ID: openalex.W2902169845
URL: https://doi.org/10.1515/joll-2018-0006

Abstract This article explores the formation of Vulgar Latin as a metalinguistic
concept in the Italian Renaissance (1435–1601) considering its continued,
although criticized, use as a concept and term in modern Romance and Latin
linguistics (1826 until the present). The choice of this topic is justified in
view of the divergent previous modern historiography and because of the lack of
a coherent historical investigation. The present study is based on a broad
selection of primary sources, in particular from classical antiquity and the
Italian Renaissance. Firstly, this article traces and clarifies the prehistory
of the concept of Vulgar Latin in ancient and medieval linguistic thought.
Section 2 demonstrates that the concept of Vulgar Latin as a low social variety
does not exist in pre-Renaissance linguistic thought. Secondly, this article
describes and analyzes how, why and when the concept of Vulgar Latin emerged and
developed in the linguistic thought of the Italian Renaissance. Section 3
surveys the historical intellectual contexts of the debates in which this
concept was formed, namely questione della lingua in the Latin and Vernacular
Italian Renaissances. Section 4 demonstrates how the ancient concept and term of
sermo vulgaris as a diaphasic variety was revived, but also modified, in the
Latin Renaissance of the fifteenth century, when the leading humanists developed
new ideas on the history, nature and variability of ancient Latin. Section 5
demonstrates how a diglossic concept of Vulgar Latin was formed in the
vernacular Italian Renaissance of the sixteenth century, when Italian
philologists more carefully approached the topic of the historical origin and
emergence of Italian. Thirdly, Section 6 presents a synthesis of the
historiographical results that are attained and revises modern historiography on
some important points.
