Title: A Qualitative Study of Embodiment among Women with Physical Disabilities during the Perinatal Period and Early Motherhood
Authors: Lesley A. Tarasoff
ID: openalex.W3108562579
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/1807/92020

Although there are over 500,000 mothers with disabilities in Canada, little is
known about how women with disabilities experience becoming and being mothers.
This dissertation qualitatively explores how thirteen women with physical
disabilities in Ontario experienced their embodiment during the perinatal period
and early motherhood. Informed by feminist disability scholarship, embodiment
here is understood as relational; that is, the intertwining of the body and the
mind and the interplay between the material body and the social world. Findings
are presented according to three “stages”: pregnancy, breastfeeding, and
mothering. I found that participants’ embodied experiences across these
interrelated “stages” were shaped by dominant discourses of pregnancy,
breastfeeding, and motherhood, as well as dominant discourses of disability,
often enacted through social interaction. Participants desired to be perceived
of as “good mothers,” seemingly to avoid being perceived of as “unfit” and in
turn affirming stigmatizing discourses of disability. Meeting the expectations
of the “good mother” proved to be challenging, however, as disability limited
what participants could physically do. Consequently, some experienced ambivalent
and negative feelings about disability. Importantly, I also found that
disability was experienced as valuable in the context of becoming and being a
mother. The embodied experience of disability provided opportunity to subvert
the sometimes-unrealistic expectations associated with pregnancy, breastfeeding,
and mothering, as well as discourses of disability as defective and undesirable.
Regarding pregnancy, the embodied experience of disability was appreciated,
offering a reimagination of the “unruly” pregnant body. Disability in the
context of breastfeeding and mothering called attention to the need for self-
care and challenged understandings of accessibility and independence. In sum,
participants’ embodied experiences of the perinatal period and early motherhood
both aligned with and subverted dominant discourses. In documenting how these
discourses shaped embodied experience, I discuss their potential implications
for health research and practice. Notably, I argue that the ways in which
participants’ embodied experiences subvert dominant discourses evoke new ways to
think about the body, disability, and parenting. These new ways of thinking add
to feminist disability and perinatal embodiment scholarship, as well as present
opportunities for more inclusive and equitable health research and practice.
