Title: 0849 Greater Actigraphic Sedentary Time Predicts Shorter Actigraphic Nightly Sleep Duration Among Adolescents
Authors: Lindsay Master, Somi Lee, Nicole G. Nahmod, Lauren Hale, Orfeu M. Buxton
ID: openalex.W2799300542
URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/sleep/zsy061.848

Previous research supports contradictory associations between daytime physical
activity and sleep duration, but less is known about the unique temporal
relationships of sedentary behavior and sleep. This study examined the daily
temporal directionality between nighttime sleep and daytime sedentary behavior,
both measured by accelerometers, in adolescents’ daily naturalistic settings.
The Fragile Families & Child Wellbeing Study is a longitudinal cohort of
children born 1998–2000 in 20 U.S. cities. At age 15, a sub-sample of these
children (N=640) concurrently wore an accelerometric sleep monitor (Actiwatch
Spectrum) on their non-dominant wrist and a physical activity monitor (GT3X+) on
their hip for seven days. Daily minutes in sedentary behavior during wake
periods were calculated using a validated machine learning algorithm, and
nightly sleep duration, also in minutes, were scored with a previously validated
algorithm. Two-level models tested the between- and within-person temporal
association between total nightly sleep duration and total daily sedentary time
(sleep preceding sedentary time, or sedentary time preceding sleep). An
additional logistic regression model was run in order to detect the odds of
next-day napping as a function of nightly sleep duration. Analyses adjusted for
sociodemographic and family characteristics. Within individuals, daily amounts
of hip accelerometry-derived sedentary time were inversely related to that
night’s wrist actigraphically-determined sleep duration (β=-0.21, p<0.0001).
Specifically, each hour of additional sedentary time was associated with a
reduction of sleep duration by approximately 12 minutes that night. Not
surprisingly, on days following nights with longer sleep duration, adolescents
had a lower likelihood of napping. With a one-hour increase in sleep duration,
the odds of napping were lower by approximately 24% (β=-0.27, p<0.0001).
However, nightly sleep duration was not significantly associated with next-day
waking sedentary time within individuals. Within-person patterns of sleep and
sedentary time suggest that waking minutes spent in sedentary behavior may
affect nightly sleep duration in adolescents’ daily lives. Future analyses will
examine how different types of daily physical activities (combinations of
sedentary, light, moderate-to-vigorous activities) are associated with sleep
health patterns in adolescence. R01HD073352
