Title: Teachers' conceptions of their roles in adolescents' identity formation
Authors: Folajimi Akinribola
ID: openalex.W2888964080
URL: https://trepo.tuni.fi/handle/10024/104151

This empirical research was set out with the purpose of describing teachers’
conceptions of adolescents’ identity formation and their role as they interact
with adolescents in the classroom context. The study focused on the emerging
meanings teachers give to their experience of identity formation in adolescent
students. The area of study in education is identity with focus on identity
formation agents.&#13;\n &#13;\nThe subjects were teachers in lower and upper
secondary school in Finland. Data were collected from four subjects and all the
subjects were teachers of grade nine students. The subjects all agreed to the
ethical ground of non-disclosure of their identity in term of name or the use of
descriptions that will make them identifiable. Two subjects were only subject
teachers while the other two have had the opportunity of additional
responsibility of being mentors in the last one year prior to this
study.&#13;\n&#13;\nThe approach chosen for this qualitative study was
phenomenography. This approach has been used for decades in the field of
education and it is to describe the meanings that subjects give their experience
in relation to a phenomenon. The data collection tool used to elicit relevant
narratives from subjects in other to describe their conceptions of adolescent
students’ identity formation and their role in the process was a semi-structured
interview. This interview was designed using the main research questions to
create nine-item open-ended questions.&#13;\n&#13;\nConsequently, the research
findings indicated that all the subjects’ meanings for identity formation are
into three different facets which are adaptive, existentiality and subjective
conception. Adaptive conception means identity formation is a process of
developing the capacity to respond to the social environment in a tangible
sense. Existentiality conception means making sense of self and fitting self
into the world through the process of identity formation. Subjective conception
means that identity formation is about feeling cozy with
self.&#13;\n&#13;\nAdditionally, the result indicated that all the subjects
played an agentic role in the identity formation of their adolescent students.
However, the descriptions of their experience in relation to the phenomenon
created two types of role conceptions. The first group’s conception of their
role did not transcend beyond subject matter and the curriculum. The pivot of
their role as subject teachers is on the subject matter and adolescents’
academic competencies only. The second group’s conception of their role is as
identity agents which is operationalized intentionally; through their subject
matters and daily interaction with adolescent students. They specifically,
mentioned that giving adolescent students the opportunity to independently make
academic choices is beneficial for identity formation.&#13;\n&#13;\n
Conclusively, the result indicated that all the subjects acted as identity
agents although some were unaware and unintentionally acting as identity
formation agents. Identity formation is a necessity for every adolescent and the
emergence of coherent identity is not a given. Therefore, the need for identity
and identity formation to be a core course of study for all student teachers and
part of a continuous professional development program for on the job teachers is
essential. Thus, well-informed teachers will play their role reflectively and
effectively as identity formation agents.
