Title: Migrants and Literature in Finland and Sweden
Authors: Satu Gröndahl, Eila Rantonen
ID: openalex.W4289363330
URL: https://doi.org/10.21435/sflit.11

Migrants and Literature in Finland and Sweden presents new comparative
perspectives on transnational literary studies. This collection provides a
contribution to the production of new narratives of the nation. The focus of the
contributions is contemporary fiction relating to experiences of migration. The
volume discusses multicultural writing, emerging modes of writing and generic
innovations. When people are in motion, it changes nations, cultures and
peoples. The volume explores the ways in which transcultural connections have
affected the national self-understanding in the Swedish and Finnish context. It
also presents comparative aspects on the reception of literary works and
explores the intersectional perspectives of identities including class, gender,
ethnicity, ‘race’ and disability. Further, it also demonstrates the complexity
of grouping literatures according to nation and ethnicity. The case-studies are
divided into three chapters: II ‘Generational Shifts’, III ‘Reception and
Multicultural Perspectives’ and IV ‘Writing Migrant Identities’. The migration
of Finnish labourers to Sweden is reflected in Satu Gröndahl’s and Kukku
Melkas’s contributions to this volume, the latter also discusses material
related to the placing of Finnish war children (‘krigsbarn’) in Sweden during
World War II. Migration between Russia and Finland is discussed by Marja
Sorvari, while Johanna Domokos attempts at mapping the Finnish literary field
and offering a model for literary analysis. Transformations of the Finnish
literary field are also the focus of Hanna-Leena Nissilä’s article discussing
the reception of novels by a selection of women authors with an im/migrant
background. The African diaspora and the arrival of refugees to Europe from
African countries due to wars and political conflicts in the 1970s is the
backdrop of Anne Heith’s analysis of migration and literature, while Pirjo
Ahokas deals with literature related to the experiences of a Korean adoptee in
Sweden. Migration from Africa to Sweden also forms the setting of Eila
Rantonen’s article about a novel by a successful, Swedish author with roots in
Tunisia. Exile, gender and disability are central, intertwined themes of Marta
Ronne’s article, which discusses the work of a Swedish-Latvian author who
arrived in Sweden in connection to World War II. This collection is of
particular interest to students and scholars in literary and Nordic studies as
well as transnational and migration studies.
