Title: Faith Development While Abroad Amongst African American Students
Authors: Thandiwe Dinani
ID: openalex.W2788181576
URL: https://doi.org/10.36366/frontiers.v30i1.400

Spiritual development is an epistemological journey of seeking to make meaning
of life’s activities, order, and the relationship between events (Love, 2002).
This process occurs when students experience a degree of dissonance that pushes
them to question what they know, how they know it, and expand their
understanding based on new experiences and information learned (Bakari, 2000;
Chaudhari &amp; Pizzolato, 2008). Studying abroad provides opportunities for
students to encounter disequilibrium as they interact with other cultures that
cause them to consider alternative viewpoints, and enable other’s practices and
beliefs to influence the formation of their own views, beliefs and practices
(Chaudhari &amp; Pizzolato, 2008).&#x0D; This article utilizes Fowler’s (1981)
stages of faith development to understand the meaning-making and spiritual
development of study abroad participants. Multiple semi-structured interviews
(pre-, during, and post-study abroad) were conducted with 25 African-American
students who participated in long-term, immersive, study-abroad programs in 13
different countries on 5 different continents. During pre-study abroad
interviews, three participants disclosed a faith-background and expressed
intention to connect with a community of believers during their time abroad.
These participants were in what Fowler would consider a synthetic-conventional
stage of faith development, characterized by conventional practices influenced
from home and parental influences. While abroad, five students shared that they
had independently researched local churches in their host countries, and
regularly attended services alone or with another study abroad participant,
because they needed the support of a community of believers to empower them
during their time abroad. Additionally, numerous participants addressed
differences in how faith is discussed and practiced in their host country and
America. One-third of participants discussed studying abroad having an impact on
their faith and religious beliefs. In addition, participants discussed specific
lessons and practices learned from their community of believers in their host
countries, which they intended to incorporate in their faith practices and
beliefs upon return to the U.S. Particularly interesting was a distinction noted
between the role faith plays in the U.S. and abroad: participants described
their faith communities in the U.S. placing a strong emphasis on what God can do
for people, whereas in faith communities abroad, the emphasis was placed on
believer’s responsibility to worship God rather than on what God does or does
not provide.&#x0D; Another key finding was the connection between student
development stages of identity development and stages of faith development.
Participants in later stages of identity development demonstrated a transition
from Fowler’s synthetic-conventional stage of faith development to the
individuative-reflective stage of faith development. In the individuative-
reflective stage, students break free from parental and community influenced
practices to explore their own thoughts and experiences of God and determine for
themselves how they will practice their faith. A similar process occurs in
practices and behaviors when a student explores and forms a solidified identity
– they shift from parental and communal influences on identity formation to
forming beliefs and actions based on personal experiences and thoughts.
