Title: Tjukurpa Pulka The Road to Eldership How Aboriginal Culture Creates Sacred and Visionary Leaders
Authors: Tjanara Goreng Goreng
ID: openalex.W2908181309
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/1885/149431

Robert Kegan says that sacred leadership is a particular order of consciousness
that applies to people who have navigated their emotional stages of development
to become individuals who go beyond the ego to become ‘sacred’ in their thinking
and being. They are leaders who motivate and inspire others to follow them. In
Aboriginal communities in Australia, Elders have always been considered leaders
because of similar qualities to those espoused by Kegan and other western sacred
and visionary leadership theorists. Indigenous researchers and writers in the
field express the wisdom of our Elders as leaders in our language that espouses
similar theories of sacredness. This thesis examines Elders as sacred leaders
through the process of their development in Aboriginal culture, education and
experiences and analyses that through the western and Indigenous leadership
theoretical lens. The research was undertaken utilising Robert Kegan’s theories
of western leadership, in particular, his work on higher levels of thinking in
transformational leadership from an educational psychology perspective and Erik
Erickson’s Stages of Human Development in addition examining the research of
Indigenous leadership researchers and writers internationally and nationally. In
addition, to explain the transformative processes of achieving higher levels of
thinking when one’s development is arrested through colonisation, violence,
abuse, dependency and acculturation, the thesis seeks to find what practices or
events in cultural development supported an individuals’ movement through the
levels of thinking to sacred leadership based in these theories. The thesis
examines whether these western theories have any application, correlation or
parallels in Aboriginal culture. Utilising an Indigenous research methodology,
four Aboriginal storytellers on their Roads to Eldership describe their life’s
journeys which are then analysed to ascertain their development stages, levels
of thinking, and their values and motivations as leaders and Elders. The aim is
to ascertain whether these storytellers have achieved higher levels of thinking
on their road to Eldership, through navigating their stages of development, and
overcoming any arrested development experiences, challenges, adversities and
their transformational actions. Furthermore, the thesis shows how Tjukurpa Pulka
- following the Law in action, and the inclusion of cultural and ceremonial life
- contributes to healing arrested development and enables development to
Eldership and the choice to move onto become visionary and sacred leaders. On
the basis of my findings, the stories told, point to a contemporary practice of
an ancient form of leadership development that mirrors the qualities and traits
of higher levels of thinking. It shows how sacred leadership levels can be
achieved through participation in cultural life, living in the Tjukurpa – the
Law and spiritual business – and engaging in ceremonies, service to community,
visioning and healing recovery processes. This study is important to show that
Aboriginal culture has had a generational process of educating children and
young adults with the vision of creating Elders as leaders who can serve their
communities and it crosses clan groups because of the impacts of separation
through colonisation. The research has a contribution to make to the maintenance
of Aboriginal cultural knowledge specifically and to understanding the oral
teachings and learnings of an ancient culture, as well as showing how this
information can be applied to leadership development and theory in the present
modern world.
