Title: Arts-Based Research Approaches to Studying Mechanisms of Change in the Creative Arts Therapies
Authors: Nancy Gerber, Karolina Bryl, Noah Potvin, Carol Ann Blank
ID: openalex.W2896466478
URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02076

The purpose of this preliminary qualitative research study is to explore the
role and function of multiple dynamic interactive aesthetic and intersubjective
phenomena in the creative arts therapies process relative to transformation in
perception, behavior, relationship, and well-being. A group of doctoral students
and faculty studied these phenomena in an analogous creative arts therapies
laboratory context using a method called <i>Intrinsic Arts-Based Research.
Intrinsic Arts-Based Research</i> is a systematic study of psychological,
emotional, relational, and arts-based phenomena, parallel to those emergent in
the creative arts therapies, using individual and collective intrinsic immersive
and reflective experience in combination with qualitative and arts-based
research methods. Our primary goal was to simulate the creative arts therapies
experience in order to identify, document, and describe the complex
transformative phenomena that occur at the nexus of arts-based expression,
reflection, and relationships in the arts therapies. For the purposes of this
paper transformation is defined as "…. a significant reconfiguration of
perception and thought resulting in the lessening of psychic restraint and pain,
allowing for the emergence of new psychological perspectives that contribute to
living a more creative life" (Gerber et al., 2012, p. 45). Through a deductive
thematic analysis of written accounts of these simulated creative arts therapies
experiences by participant/researchers in the laboratory we identified three
primary dynamic and interactive broad constructs that together, with more
specific modifying themes, might account for and describe change within the
creative arts therapies. These broad dynamic interactive themes are: ruptures,
resolutions, and transformation; relationship and intersubjectivity; and, arts-
based expressive processes. The more specific modifying themes include:
<i>dialectical rupture and resolution, relational attunements and ruptures,
imaginational flow, transcendence and ruptures, sensory/kinesthetic/embodied
ways of knowing, and intersubjective transcendence</i>. We propose that change
in the creative arts therapies is driven more by a dynamic system of interactive
phenomena the varying combinations of which create conditions for relational
attunement, imagination, dialectical tensions and creative resolutions, and the
ultimately creative transformation.
