Title: Living in this space: Case studies of children's lived experiences in four spatially diverse early childhood centres
Authors: Ann Pairman
ID: openalex.W4243576057
URL: https://doi.org/10.26686/wgtn.17072315.v1

&lt;p&gt;Consistent with international trends, many children in Aotearoa New
Zealand (NZ) spend the majority of their waking day in an early childhood centre
[ECE]. Drawing on children’s and teachers’ perspectives in four spatially
diverse, all-day ECE centres in NZ, this study investigated the relationship
between ECE centre built environments and children’s lived experiences in light
of characteristics of ‘child-friendly’ environments (Chatterjee 2005, Kennedy,
1991). Situated at the intersection of children’s geography and childhood
sociology, this thesis used case-study methodology to foreground the
experiential aspects of children’s spatial interactions, including their
feelings of wellbeing and privacy, their mobility and social interactions.
Conceptually, this study draws on a constructionist paradigm derived from
Lefebvre’s (1991) theorisation of space as a product of the social-material
relations, and from his notion of rhythmanalysis (2004); combining the two
Lefebvrian concepts with Gibson’s (1979) theory of affordances provides a novel
approach for understanding the agency of children and teachers in the process of
the production of space. Research strategies were primarily ethnographic and
included naturalistic observation, video records, child-led tours, photography,
bookmaking, spatial mapping, focus groups, and measurement of noise levels. The
findings revealed that space and its materiality matters for children’s lived
experiences as well as for children’s and teachers’ agency. Opportunities for
child-friendly lived experiences were influenced by the extent to which diverse
rhythms and activities could coexist harmoniously in each physical space, with
larger and more complex spaces offering greater affordances. The size of each
centre’s activity space added a layer of dynamics to spatiality by narrowing or
expanding these opportunities. Additionally, open-plan space afforded highly
mobile younger children opportunities to exercise agency through collaboration.
The rules and norms that governed children’s spatial practices were influenced
by teachers' decisions and actions and these were enabled or constrained by
spatial affordances. My findings suggest that, in addition to the ‘iron
triangle’ of adult:child ratios, group size, and qualifications, space is an
affordance that can create the conditions for quality practices, rich lived
experiences, and teachers’ and children’s agency. A number of theoretical,
conceptual and empirical contributions are made to our understandings of young
children’s lives in group based ECE settings.&lt;/p&gt;
