Title: Intellectual Property in Experience
Authors: Madhavi Sunder
ID: openalex.W2898829886
URL: https://doi.org/10.36644/mlr.117.2.intellectual

In today’s economy, consumers demand experiences. From Star Wars to Harry
Potter, fans do not just want to watch or read about their favorite characters—
they want to be them. They don the robes of Gryffindor, flick their wands, and
drink the butterbeer. The owners of fantasy properties understand this,
expanding their offerings from light sabers to the Galaxy’s Edge®, the new
Disney Star Wars immersive theme park opening in 2019.Since Star Wars, Congress
and the courts have abetted what is now a $262 billion-a-year industry in
merchandising, fashioning “merchandising rights” appurtenant to copyrights and
trademarks that give fantasy owners exclusive rights to supply our fantasy
worlds with everything from goods to a good time. But are there any limits? Do
merchandising rights extend to fan activity, from fantasy-themed birthday
parties and summer camps to real world Quidditch leagues? This Article
challenges the conventional account, arguing that as the economic value of
fantasy merchandising increases in the emergent “experience economy,”
intellectual property owners may prove less keen on tolerating uncompensated
uses of their creations. In fact, from Amazon’s Kindle Worlds granting licenses
for fan fiction, to crackdowns on sales of fan art sold on internet sites like
Etsy, to algorithms taking down fan videos from YouTube, the holders of
intellectual property in popular fantasies are seeking to create a world
requiring licenses to make, do, and play. This Article turns to social and
cultural theories of art as experience, learning by doing, tacit knowledge, and
performance to demonstrate that fan activity, from discussion sites to live-
action role-playing fosters learning, creativity, and sociability. Law must be
attentive to the profound effects these laws have on human imagination and
knowledge creation. I apply the insights of these theories to limit
merchandising rights in imaginative play through fair use, the force in the
legal galaxy intended to bring balance to intellectual property law.
