Title: Visual Ethnography as tool in exploring children's embodied making processes in preprimary education
Authors: Kari Carlsen
ID: openalex.W2896264437
URL: https://doi.org/10.7577/formakademisk.1909

This article presents and discuss Visual Ethnography as Methodological approach
to research on embodied making and learning in preprimary education. Children’s
making processes with materials and tools are visible. What children learn in
and through these processes is not necessary visible. The article reflect on how
visual ethnography (Pink, 2007) contribute to uncover and understand ongoing
learning processes through visual documented making situations. The empirical
material referred to, includes children from one to six years old and staff in
Norwegian kindergarten as participants. Ethnographic methods are frequently used
in educational research. Rose (2007) discusses visual methods within different
methodological approaches.&#x0D; Preschools and Early Childhood Centers in
Reggio Emilia, Italy (Giudici, Rinaldi, Krechevsky, 2001; Rinaldi, 2006; Vecchi,
2010) has developed various ways of documentation that focus on visual readable
material. Norwegian kindergartens inspired by the educational experiences in
Reggio Emilia aims to develop pedagogical documentation as didactic tool in
daily educational processes, with visual presentations as central part. The
article discusses how visual ethnography as method gives the opportunity to
present research findings also through visual representations, how these may
give another insight in small children’s making than pure written text, and
focus on ethical dilemmas concerning visual presentation. The connection between
visual ethnography as research method and the presentation of research insights
and findings, explore and visualize small children’s learning processes during
embodied making with materials and tools, and contribute to research on
children’s learning processes in preprimary education. &#x0D; Key words: Visual
ethnography, pictures, video, preprimary education, materials, embodied making
and learning, Reggio Emilia atelier
