Title: The Human–Nature Experience: A Phenomenological-Psychoanalytic Perspective
Authors: Robert Schweitzer, Harriet Louise Glab, Eric Brymer
ID: openalex.W2803923471
URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00969

Drawing upon phenomenology and psychoanalytic concepts, we explore and explicate
participants' lived experience of the natural world. The authors draw upon
Husserl's description of consciousness as intentionality and his later work on
the life-world, in exploring experiences which provide a basis for a
psychochoanalytic understanding of the human-nature experience. Unstructured
interviews were undertaken with nine participants, each of whom regarded nature
as being significant for their sense of wellbeing. The lived experiences were
explicated drawing upon the two processes: Giorgi's descriptive phenomenological
psychological methodology and psychoanalytic researcher reflexivity. Data
analysis and explication involved the following steps: (1) a thorough reading of
each interview transcript, (2) breaking data into parts by demarcating meaning
units, (3) organizing data by translating meaning units into units of
psychological experience through coding, and (4) arriving at a summary of the
data which involved organizing and reviewing units of psychological experience.
The process of reflection led to the formulation of an essential psychological
structure of participants' lived experience of the natural world. We argue that
the human-nature relationship can be conceived in terms of psychoanalytic
concepts, and in particular, constructs based upon an understanding of the
primacy of attachment relationships. The natural world is elucidated as (a)
nature being experienced as a primary attachment, (b) nature experienced as a
secure base, (c) nature experienced as twinship, (d) nature experienced as
containing, and (e) nature experienced as embodied. This paper extends previous
empirical descriptions of the human-nature relationship by incorporating
psychoanalytic processes and theory into a theoretically informed qualitative
methodological stance. Beyond the traditional notion of nature as something 'out
there' that we can interact with for cognitive or emotional restoration,
participants in this study described the experience of nature as being integral
to their sense of self. This study suggests that experiences that facilitate
immersion in nature provide opportunities for the development of an integrated
sense of self that has a profound impact on a participant's sense of wellbeing.
The findings further demonstrate the convergence between phenomenology and
psychoanalytic constructs which offers a richness to our understanding the
subjectivity of participants and their relationship with nature, a perspective
not often attainable through more traditional quantitative research
methodologies.
