Title: Hubungan Antara Persepsi Keharmonisan Keluarga, Penerimaan Diri Dengan Depresi Remaja Perempuan
Authors: Asti Witantri, Nisa Rachmah Nur Anganthi
ID: openalex.W2996549553
URL: 

Adolescence is the full time of confusion for individual so many teenagers
sustain depression. Female adolescent are known to be at greater risk of
depression than men. The family environment and individual self-acceptance are
related to depression. This study aims to determine the relationship between
family harmony and self-acceptance with depression in female adolescents, to
know the relationship of family harmony with depression, and to know the
relationship of self-acceptance with depression. This research used quantitative
research method. Population of this research are female adolescents at
vocational high school in Surakarta. The research samples are class X in a
private vocational high school in Surakarta which amounts to 128 students. The
sampling technique used is Random Sampling. Data analysis techniques used is
parametric analysis of multiple linear regression. The result of the research
shows that 1) on the Anova table is obtained the value of F = 2,305 with sig.=
0,104 (p &gt; 0,05) which means the sig value is not fulfilled so that means
there is no correlation between family harmony and self-acceptance with
depression in female adolescent, 2) on the correlations table is obtained the
correlation coefficient value (r) = –0,187 with Sig. = 0,017 (p &lt; 0,05) which
means the sig value is fulfilled so that means there is negative correlation
between family harmony with depression in female adolescent, and 3) on the
correlations table is obtained the correlation coefficient value (r) = –0,059
with Sig. (1-tailed) = 0,253 (p &gt; 0,05) which means the sig value is not
fulfilled so that means there is no correlation between self-acceptance with
depression in female adolescent. The effective contribution of family harmony to
adolescent depression is 3,6%. The limitation of this research is that the
research sample was conducted 3 times because there was no observation the
number of female students of class X in the Surakarta private vocational high
school and the criteria of the study sample that were not in accordance with the
variables that would be revealed in this research. The implications of this
study indicate that efforts to create a harmonious family environment form the
character of adolescent self-acceptance and equally affect the mental health of
adolescents.
