Title: Rethinking communication: integrating storytelling for increased stakeholder engagement in environmental evidence synthesis
Authors: Anneli Sundin, Karolin Andersson, Robert D. Watt
ID: openalex.W2797150182
URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/s13750-018-0116-4

Storytelling is a two-way interaction, written or oral, between someone telling
a story and one or more listeners. It is a well-known and powerful means of
communicating messages and engaging audiences. In this commentary paper, we
present a framework for the integration of storytelling in systematic reviews
and systematic maps at the stages where stakeholders are actively involved.
Using storytelling to explain complex research has, in the past, not been
considered a rigorous method of communicating science. But an increasing number
of studies are showing how narratives can be useful for developing trust with an
audience and increasing knowledge retention as well as the ability and
willingness by audiences to learn and take action. Being easily digested by the
human brain, stories help bridging between our logos and pathos; when an
audience becomes emotionally receptive of facts, chances increase that they will
respond and act on the knowledge. Here, we argue that storytelling holds
potential as a tool in systematic reviews and systematic maps, serving mainly
two purposes. First, collecting contextual narratives from stakeholders at the
stages of question formulation and protocol writing can help to inform and
generate relevant research questions and review designs. Here, we refer to
contextual narratives as stories gathered from stakeholders to gain an
understanding of their perspective. Second, creating a final story that
faithfully presents the review results, while also relating to the contextual
narratives, can contribute to effective communication of the results to
stakeholders as well as to a broader audience. This approach can increase their
engagement with the science and the implementation of evidence-based decisions.
The paper concludes that storytelling holds untapped potential for communicating
evidence from systematic reviews and maps for increased stakeholder engagement.
It is time for researchers and research networks such as the Collaboration for
Environmental Evidence to support and emphasize the importance of exploring new
tools for effective science communication, such as storytelling.
