Title: In Pursuit of Beauty Within the Ageing Body: Voices from Older Korean Women in New Zealand
Authors: Saemyi Chung
ID: openalex.W2788735312
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10523/7853

Researchers have attempted to explore the experience of ageing bodies and the
use of beauty and anti ageing practices among older women. However, an
insufficient number of such studies have focused on women from diverse ethnic
groups, particularly older Asian women. Furthermore, even though some
researchers have debated whether beauty practices are a form of oppression,
these debates usually obfuscate the unique experiences of older women. These
deficiencies result in a scarcity of discussions on anti-ageing practices and
health management among older Asian migrant women.&#13;\n&#13;\nThis study,
using intersectionality as a conceptual lens, explored how older South Korean
(Korean, hereafter) women in New Zealand who are located at the intersection of
age (ageing) and gender perceived their ageing bodies and engaged in beauty,
anti-ageing and health practices within diverse social positions and identities.
The method involved conducting semi-structured individual interviews with
thirty-one Korean women aged 50 to 84 living in Auckland, Christchurch, Dunedin,
Hamilton, and Queenstown.&#13;\n&#13;\nThe findings were merged into two major
themes: 1) the inevitable and unacceptable ageing body and 2) the tensions
between choice and oppression. The first theme elucidates how attitudes towards
the ageing body were paradoxical. On the one hand, the ageing body was something
my participants understood as part of a natural/irresistible process. On the
other hand, they consistently intervened in the natural process of ageing to
transform their ageing bodies into more acceptable forms: healthy, functional,
and feminine bodies with youthful and attractive appearance. They also adopted
diverse lifestyles: active, productive, and successful later lives through
health practices, life management, and beauty and anti-ageing practices. The
second theme describes how power over their ageing bodies was exercised when
they intervened at the intersection of age, gender, and/or race/ethnicity. The
findings uncover how the interaction of biological attributes of the ageing body
and socio-cultural climates of age and gender influenced my participants’
perceptions of their bodies. Additionally, the findings indicate how their
engagements in beauty, anti-ageing, and health practices became complicated as
they positioned themselves at the intersection of age/ageing, gender,
race/ethnicity, and migration.&#13;\n&#13;\nThe significance of this thesis lies
in its contribution to illuminating the concept of the biosocial ageing body.
Furthermore, it intends to challenge binary perspectives of the body, namely
that between nature and culture, and to supply further knowledge to current
discussions on whether women’s beauty practices are a form of oppression or
choice. Lastly, this thesis discusses the implications of this research and
recommendations for future research on the ageing body (ageing) and beauty
practices.
