Title: Identity Formation and Change amongst Female Adolescent Migrant Bloggers
Authors: C.M. Stolte
ID: openalex.W2900208238
URL: http://dspace.library.uu.nl:8080/handle/1874/371203

This paper deals with the identity change of female adolescent migrant bloggers.
The concept of identity will be examined, concluding that it is based on an
individual’s categorisation with a specific group. Furthermore, identity will be
defined as the result of actions. We are what we do, rather than simply who we
are. Language plays an important role as a categorisation feature as well as an
individual’s action. Based on this knowledge, it can be claimed that identity is
able to change, especially concerning young adults who go through a period of
adaption and development. When it comes to female adolescent migrants, blogging
allows them to stay connected with their family and friends back home on the one
hand and it serves as a chance to reflect on themselves and their lives in their
new environment on the other. Writing plays and important role in order to deal
with the insecurities of migration. Being creative and having a word which is
understood by their followers leads to a good feeling. The bloggers share part
of their lives with the readers, by which they create a space for a new online
community, where followers and blogger agree on certain values, interests and
opinions. Moreover, their youth identity is influenced by a combination of new
encounters in a different environment, habits that come to the forth due to the
new culture they are a part of, and a new language context the female migrants
are confronted with. Blogposts of four young female expats will help to explain
the theory. Moreover, I will tell my own story as a German migrant, residing in
the Netherlands in the form of a blogpost. My work will serve as practice-based
research. This paper indicates that female migrant bloggers experience a shift
of their identity when they write in another language and online content
creation helps to develop an understanding of the self. However, the perception
of a new identity is not only based on the new language they are confronted
with, but it is also created by the new culture and the expat’s encounters with
people living in the host culture.
