Title: Parenting style and first year students’ adjustment at university : mediation via trait emotional intelligence in higher education institutions– a dimensional and typological approach
Authors: Desalegn Fenta Tarekegn
ID: openalex.W2898833116
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10500/24984

The primary purpose of this study was to examine the potential mediating effect
of TEI on the relationship between parenting style/dimension and first year
students’ university adjustment in higher education institutions of Ethiopia.
The study sought to test a model where parental responsiveness, parental
demandingness and the TEI interactively and individually, relate to adjustment.
A total of 464 first year university students from three public universities
participated in this study. The results of preliminary analyses pertaining to
the predominantly practiced parenting style in the families of Ethiopia revealed
that if gender is ignored, the most common parenting style is the neglectful
style followed very closely by the authoritative style. However, parenting
styles varied as a function of students’ gender. A statistically significant TEI
score difference was found among the four parenting style categories. Results
also revealed that a statistically significant difference on adjustment mean
score was found among the four parenting style categories. The t-test result
revealed that there was a statistically significant difference between male and
female first year university students with regard to TEI score but there was no
a statistically significant difference between male and female first year
university students with respect to the adjustment score. The path analysis
result also revealed that parental dimensions (responsiveness and demandingness)
and TEI had a statistically significant and positive direct effect on
adjustment. The multiple regression result showed that TEI, parental
responsiveness and parental demandingness interactively explained 31.9 percent
of the variance on adjustment. Finally, the mediation analysis results revealed
that TEI plays a meditation role, but only partially, in the parental
demandingness and adjustment relationship, and in the parental responsiveness
and adjustment relationship, which potentially confirms that the adjustment
scale can explain the relationship between the demandingness and responsiveness
dimension-variables of parenting style and TEI. Based on the results of the
present study, some practical, theoretical and methodological implications of
the study for designing interventions to maximize students’ adjustment in higher
education institutions are addressed. Moreover, recommendations, limitations and
future directions are addressed for researchers to take lesson in undertaking
this or similar types of research in the future.
