Title: Pengaruh Media Pendidikan Gizi (Komik) terhadap Peningkatan Pengetahuan dan Perubahan Berat Badan pada Anak Sekolah Dasar dengan Obesitas
Authors: Arie Nugroho
ID: openalex.W2883364343
URL: https://doi.org/10.26630/jk.v9i1.746

School age is a time when children experience rapid growth. At this age of
physical activity continues to increase such as play, exercise. Wrong eating
habits in schoolchildren can lead to serious nutritional problems, such as
obesity. Eating behavior such as consumption of junk food and fried is
associated with the occurrence of obesity in school children. This study was to
determine the effect of nutritional education media (comic) to increase
knowledge and weight loss in elementary school children with obesity in the city
of Bandar Lampung. This study included experiment research with quasi-experiment
design study, conducted in Bandar Lampung City Elementary School. Subjects in
the case were obese primary school children who received nutritional media
(comic) intervention. The number of subjects consisted of 31 cases and 31
controls. The variables observed included weight changes and changes in
knowledge of data. Data analysis was done by independent t-test and pair t-test.
There was the influence of nutrition media intervention (comic) to the score of
knowledge was shown with p-value=0,001. Where the increase of knowledge score
only in the treatment group that was from 10,96+1,99 to 13,38+1,68. While
nutrition media intervention (comic) did not give effect to changes in obese
child weight shown with a p-value that is 0,491 for treatment group and 0,725
for the control group. The nutritional media (comic) interventions can improve
the knowledge score of obese primary school children but have no effect on
changes in child weight. The intervention should be done more than 2 weeks to
see directly effect of nutritional media (comic) intervention on weight change,
we should involve the professional in making comics and experiment on the use of
comics as a material of intervention to the same population.
