Title: A cross-cultural comparison of dual career environments for elite athletes in Switzerland, Denmark, and Poland
Authors: Andreas Kuettel, Mette Krogh Christensen, J. Zysko, Jørn Hansen
ID: openalex.W2753853035
URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/1612197x.2018.1553889

The purpose of this qualitative study is (a) to explore and compare the beliefs
and values of the stakeholders working in different national dual career
environments, and (b) to enhance the understanding of the relationship between
athletes’ dual career trajectories and the respective environments. Twelve semi-
structured interviews with key informants involved in dual career from
Switzerland, Denmark, and Poland were used to discussing benefits, obstacles and
best practices of their national dual career settings. Interviews were content
analysed in a deductive-inductive way using (Schein, E. H. (2010).
Organizational culture and leadership (4th ed.). San Francisco, CA: John Wiley &
Sons) cultural framework. Besides the differences in support for elite athletes
in higher education across the national contexts, the key informants expressed
divergent values and attitudes, which were due to their opinions on how dual
careers should be organised. These values were found to be linked to the
ideologies of the welfare regimes in the given country. Since dual career
practices and programmes are based on different underlying basic assumptions in
the three contexts studied, divergent dual career trajectories are proposed to
athletes as the typical way to combine elite sport and education. Based on the
results of our cross-cultural comparison, we assert that culture is not only an
influential but also a constituting factor in the development of dual career
environments. Thus, we propose a culturally sensitive approach towards the dual
career of athletes and invite professionals (e.g. coaches, career advisors, and
educational programme leaders) to critically reflect on their contextualised
values about how to support dual career athletes.
