Title: Translucent Voices: Creating Sound Pedagogy And Safe Spaces For Transgender Singers In The Choral Rehearsal
Authors: Gerald Dorsey Gurss
ID: openalex.W2912745924
URL: https://scholarcommons.sc.edu/etd/4655

While transgender rights and issues are gaining an increasing amount of
attention in both pop culture and, to some extent, in the education sector,
little information is available for the choral conductor that provides
pedagogical tools for transitioning voices. This document provides conductor-
educators with both a brief look at the transgender experience and also tools to
create safe learning environments, from gender-inclusive language to vocal
exercises to encourage healthy vocal transitions in transgender singers Twenty-
first century choruses are not the first institutions in the realm of Western
art music that have faced visual, aural, and enigmatic conceptualizations of
gender and stereotypical gender roles. This document bridges centuries of gender
nonconformity found in Western art music spanning Renaissance churches, to
Baroque theatres, to the choral rehearsal spaces of the 21st century. Both sonic
and visual gender presentation are examined as well as the points at which these
two seemingly diverge and intersect. The study of transitioning transgender
singers’ voices is emerging research. However, Western music history does offer
several examples of both visual and sonic blurring of gender presentation, such
as boy choirs, castrati, pants roles, and popular music styles like Doo-Wop
where high falsetto singing is a key element. A review ofcurrentliterature
concerning transgender issues in music education and speech pathology is
discussed. Additionally, this document is built upon a survey of 154 singers,
both cisgender and transgender. The survey respondents share both positive and
negative experiences relating to interactions with choral conductors and the
rehearsals in which the singers engage. Their experiences are case studies on
the impact of the conductor-teacher’s use of language during rehearsals.
Language, especially the use of gendered pronouns and gendering entire sections
within the chorus, can be psychologically damaging to both cisgender and
transgender singers. The document examines ways in which conductor-teachers can
avoid using gender altogether when addressing members of the chorus. In addition
to language misuse, transgender survey respondents who are undergoing physical
transition identify vocal hurdles due to the introduction of artificial hormones
and thus, undergoing (for many) a second puberty. By comparing FtM and MtF vocal
transition to cisgender male and female puberty, one can extract the
similarities that both singers will face in terms of developing a healthy new
voice. The document will offer a series of exercises designed to help
transgender singers transition into their new voices with maximum success.
Finally, the document will offer two methods by which conductors can be
inclusive of transgender singers in the programming choices of choral
repertoire. The first type aids transitioning singers in being successful with a
new voice with an ever-changing range. The second type of repertoire is that
which champions the work of transgender composers or whose text is concerned
with transgender persons, thus normalizing the transgender experience and
creating opportunities for educational discussions within the chorus.
