Title: The adolescent school pupil, psycho-social theory and practice, and the construction of a pedagogy of discipline in Britain, 1911-1989
Authors: Andrew David Burchell
ID: openalex.W2964447105
URL: 

This thesis argues that ideas about adolescence, and the types of discipline
that this age-group required, evolved considerably across twentieth-century
Britain; with schools functioning as key sites, and teachers as principal
agents, for fashioning and disseminating these. I argue, in particular, that the
period was characterised by the emergence of what I term a ‘pedagogy of
discipline’, in which teachers came to view discipline as bound together with
the fabric of the school itself and its relations with the wider community. This
was achieved in several ways. Firstly, through the ideas circulating around
adolescence, beginning with the publication of the first British text to
popularise the study of the life-stage in 1911. Secondly, through the shifting
balance between sociological, psychological and the psycho-social models for
understanding adolescents and their needs in school. And finally, through the
way in which the landscape beyond the classroom was mobilised – or failed to be
mobilised – in debates over why adolescents behaved in the way that they
did.&#13;\n&#13;\nHowever, I contend that the emphases on these different
strands shifted over the course of the period. The early-twentieth-century and
inter-war focus was largely on the adolescent as a psychological category, and
this drove a heavily reformist agenda concerning access to secondary education.
The mid-century period (c.1945-1972) witnessed a greater focus on the sociology
of the adolescent. Following scholars in the history of the social sciences,
most notably Mike Savage, I argue that the diverse range of social-scientific
research in this period contributed to an interest in the ‘landscape’, and, more
significantly, influenced teachers to develop popular sociological and
ethnographic understandings of their pupils. Lastly, the Raising of the School
Leaving Age (RoSLA) in 1972 oversaw a shift towards more quantitative efforts to
measure adolescent behaviour. This went together with a more behaviourist trend
in psychology, and particularly social psychology, which stressed the school as
a ‘system’ for containing the adolescent. This contributed to pedagogical
literature in this later half of the century, and culminated in the 1989 Elton
Inquiry into Discipline in Schools (EIDIS) which serves as the thesis’ end-
point. The thesis is structured around these chronological changes over time,
and the shifts in the various actors’ perceptions of both adolescence and
discipline which facilitated them. It concludes with two chapters that seek to
place these developments in wider context. The first of these analyses school
log-books (kept by headteachers) from across the period as a whole; while the
second concentrates on a specific moment in the early-1960s in which
adolescents’ own views on their lives, and even on discipline itself, were
sought and elicited by interested groups. It argues for the importance of
examining these as memoirs of socialisation, but also considers them as sources
composed in the context of a particularly liberal pedagogy of
discipline.&#13;\n&#13;\nI suggest that those pedagogies of discipline are
connected to the shift towards supposedly more ‘progressive’ educational
practices that several historians of education have identified as emerging to
the forefront during the twentieth century under the impetus of left-leaning
politics and child-centred psychological theories. But I argue that thinking
through the framework of discipline – as opposed to curricular content or
practices – can contribute to a reassessment of these trends. In particular,
examining developments beyond the 1960s suggests that so-called ‘progressive’
theories and practices from earlier in the century have enjoyed strange
afterlives in the behaviourist ‘systems’ processes to discipline that
increasingly veered towards more Foucauldian and governmental practices as the
twentieth century progressed.&#13;\n
