Title: LLM-Powered Multi-Agent System for Automated Crypto Portfolio Management
Authors: Yichen Luo, Yebo Feng, Jiahua Xu, Paolo Tasca, Yang Liu
ID: 2501.00826
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.00826

Cryptocurrency investment is inherently difficult due to its shorter history
compared to traditional assets, the need to integrate vast amounts of data from
various modalities, and the requirement for complex reasoning. While deep
learning approaches have been applied to address these challenges, their black-
box nature raises concerns about trust and explainability. Recently, large
language models (LLMs) have shown promise in financial applications due to their
ability to understand multi-modal data and generate explainable decisions.
However, single LLM faces limitations in complex, comprehensive tasks such as
asset investment. These limitations are even more pronounced in cryptocurrency
investment, where LLMs have less domain-specific knowledge in their training
corpora.   To overcome these challenges, we propose an explainable, multi-modal,
multi-agent framework for cryptocurrency investment. Our framework uses
specialized agents that collaborate within and across teams to handle subtasks
such as data analysis, literature integration, and investment decision-making
for the top 30 cryptocurrencies by market capitalization. The expert training
module fine-tunes agents using multi-modal historical data and professional
investment literature, while the multi-agent investment module employs real-time
data to make informed cryptocurrency investment decisions. Unique intrateam and
interteam collaboration mechanisms enhance prediction accuracy by adjusting
final predictions based on confidence levels within agent teams and facilitating
information sharing between teams. Empirical evaluation using data from November
2023 to September 2024 demonstrates that our framework outperforms single-agent
models and market benchmarks in classification, asset pricing, portfolio, and
explainability performance.
