Title: Multi-Objective Bayesian Optimization of Deep Reinforcement Learning for Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) Financial Portfolio Management
Authors: M. Coronado-Vaca
ID: 2512.14992
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.14992

DRL agents circumvent the issue of classic models in the sense that they do not
make assumptions like the financial returns being normally distributed and are
able to deal with any information like the ESG score if they are configured to
gain a reward that makes an objective better. However, the performance of DRL
agents has high variability and it is very sensible to the value of their
hyperparameters. Bayesian optimization is a class of methods that are suited to
the optimization of black-box functions, that is, functions whose analytical
expression is unknown, are noisy and expensive to evaluate. The hyperparameter
tuning problem of DRL algorithms perfectly suits this scenario. As training an
agent just for one objective is a very expensive period, requiring millions of
timesteps, instead of optimizing an objective being a mixture of a risk-
performance metric and an ESG metric, we choose to separate the objective and
solve the multi-objective scenario to obtain an optimal Pareto set of portfolios
representing the best tradeoff between the Sharpe ratio and the ESG mean score
of the portfolio and leaving to the investor the choice of the final portfolio.
We conducted our experiments using environments encoded within the OpenAI Gym,
adapted from the FinRL platform. The experiments are carried out in the Dow
Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) and the NASDAQ markets in terms of the Sharpe
ratio achieved by the agent and the mean ESG score of the portfolio. We compare
the performance of the obtained Pareto sets in hypervolume terms illustrating
how portfolios are the best trade-off between the Sharpe ratio and mean ESG
score. Also, we show the usefulness of our proposed methodology by comparing the
obtained hypervolume with one achieved by a Random Search methodology on the DRL
hyperparameter space.
