Title: Metamorphic Testing and Debugging of Tax Preparation Software
Authors: Saeid Tizpaz-Niari, Verya Monjezi, Morgan Wagner, Shiva Darian, Krystia Reed et al.
ID: 2205.04998
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.04998

Abstract:
This paper presents a data-driven framework to improve the trustworthiness of US
tax preparation software systems. Given the legal implications of bugs in such
software on its users, ensuring compliance and trustworthiness of tax
preparation software is of paramount importance. The key barriers in developing
debugging aids for tax preparation systems are the unavailability of explicit
specifications and the difficulty of obtaining oracles. We posit that, since the
US tax law adheres to the legal doctrine of precedent, the specifications about
the outcome of tax preparation software for an individual taxpayer must be
viewed in comparison with individuals that are deemed similar. Consequently,
these specifications are naturally available as properties on the software
requiring similar inputs provide similar outputs. Inspired by the metamorphic
testing paradigm, we dub these relations metamorphic relations. In collaboration
with legal and tax experts, we explicated metamorphic relations for a set of
challenging properties from various US Internal Revenue Services (IRS)
publications including Publication 596 (Earned Income Tax Credit), Schedule 8812
(Qualifying Children/Other Dependents), and Form 8863 (Education Credits). We
focus on an open-source tax preparation software for our case study and develop
a randomized test-case generation strategy to systematically validate the
correctness of tax preparation software guided by metamorphic relations. We
further aid this test-case generation by visually explaining the behavior of
software on suspicious instances using easy to-interpret decision-tree models.
Our tool uncovered several accountability bugs with varying severity ranging
from non-robust behavior in corner-cases (unreliable behavior when tax returns
are close to zero) to missing eligibility conditions in the updated versions of
software.
