Title: Aries: Efficient Testing of Deep Neural Networks via Labeling-Free Accuracy Estimation
Authors: Qiang Hu, Yuejun Guo, Xiaofei Xie, Maxime Cordy, Lei Ma et al.
ID: 2207.10942
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.10942

Abstract:
Deep learning (DL) plays a more and more important role in our daily life due to
its competitive performance in industrial application domains. As the core of
DL-enabled systems, deep neural networks (DNNs) need to be carefully evaluated
to ensure the produced models match the expected requirements. In practice, the
\emph{de facto standard} to assess the quality of DNNs in the industry is to
check their performance (accuracy) on a collected set of labeled test data.
However, preparing such labeled data is often not easy partly because of the
huge labeling effort, i.e., data labeling is labor-intensive, especially with
the massive new incoming unlabeled data every day. Recent studies show that test
selection for DNN is a promising direction that tackles this issue by selecting
minimal representative data to label and using these data to assess the model.
However, it still requires human effort and cannot be automatic. In this paper,
we propose a novel technique, named \textit{Aries}, that can estimate the
performance of DNNs on new unlabeled data using only the information obtained
from the original test data. The key insight behind our technique is that the
model should have similar prediction accuracy on the data which have similar
distances to the decision boundary. We performed a large-scale evaluation of our
technique on two famous datasets, CIFAR-10 and Tiny-ImageNet, four widely
studied DNN models including ResNet101 and DenseNet121, and 13 types of data
transformation methods. Results show that the estimated accuracy by
\textit{Aries} is only 0.03\% -- 2.60\% off the true accuracy. Besides,
\textit{Aries} also outperforms the state-of-the-art labeling-free methods in 50
out of 52 cases and selection-labeling-based methods in 96 out of 128 cases.
