Title: DiverGet: A Search-Based Software Testing Approach for Deep Neural Network Quantization Assessment
Authors: Ahmed Haj Yahmed, Houssem Ben Braiek, Foutse Khomh, Sonia Bouzidi, Rania Zaatour
ID: 2207.06282
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.06282

Abstract:
Quantization is one of the most applied Deep Neural Network (DNN) compression
strategies, when deploying a trained DNN model on an embedded system or a cell
phone. This is owing to its simplicity and adaptability to a wide range of
applications and circumstances, as opposed to specific Artificial Intelligence
(AI) accelerators and compilers that are often designed only for certain
specific hardware (e.g., Google Coral Edge TPU). With the growing demand for
quantization, ensuring the reliability of this strategy is becoming a critical
challenge. Traditional testing methods, which gather more and more genuine data
for better assessment, are often not practical because of the large size of the
input space and the high similarity between the original DNN and its quantized
counterpart. As a result, advanced assessment strategies have become of
paramount importance. In this paper, we present DiverGet, a search-based testing
framework for quantization assessment. DiverGet defines a space of metamorphic
relations that simulate naturally-occurring distortions on the inputs. Then, it
optimally explores these relations to reveal the disagreements among DNNs of
different arithmetic precision. We evaluate the performance of DiverGet on
state-of-the-art DNNs applied to hyperspectral remote sensing images. We chose
the remote sensing DNNs as they're being increasingly deployed at the edge
(e.g., high-lift drones) in critical domains like climate change research and
astronomy. Our results show that DiverGet successfully challenges the robustness
of established quantization techniques against naturally-occurring shifted data,
and outperforms its most recent concurrent, DiffChaser, with a success rate that
is (on average) four times higher.
