Title: PerfCE: Performance Debugging on Databases with Chaos Engineering-Enhanced Causality Analysis
Authors: Zhenlan Ji, Pingchuan Ma, Shuai Wang
ID: 2207.08369
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.08369

Abstract:
Debugging performance anomalies in real-world databases is challenging. Causal
inference techniques enable qualitative and quantitative root cause analysis of
performance downgrade. Nevertheless, causality analysis is practically
challenging, particularly due to limited observability. Recently, chaos
engineering has been applied to test complex real-world software systems. Chaos
frameworks like Chaos Mesh mutate a set of chaos variables to inject
catastrophic events (e.g., network slowdowns) to "stress" software systems. The
systems under chaos stress are then tested using methods like differential
testing to check if they retain their normal functionality (e.g., SQL query
output is always correct under stress). Despite its ubiquity in the industry,
chaos engineering is now employed mostly to aid software testing rather for
performance debugging. This paper identifies novel usage of chaos engineering on
helping developers diagnose performance anomalies in databases. Our presented
framework, PERFCE, comprises an offline phase and an online phase. The offline
phase learns the statistical models of the target database system, whilst the
online phase diagnoses the root cause of monitored performance anomalies on the
fly. During the offline phase, PERFCE leverages both passive observations and
proactive chaos experiments to constitute accurate causal graphs and structural
equation models (SEMs). When observing performance anomalies during the online
phase, causal graphs enable qualitative root cause identification (e.g., high
CPU usage) and SEMs enable quantitative counterfactual analysis (e.g.,
determining "when CPU usage is reduced to 45\%, performance returns to normal").
PERFCE notably outperforms prior works on common synthetic datasets, and our
evaluation on real-world databases, MySQL and TiDB, shows that PERFCE is highly
accurate and moderately expensive.
