Title: A Probabilistic Framework for Mutation Testing in Deep Neural Networks
Authors: Florian Tambon, Foutse Khomh, Giuliano Antoniol
ID: 2208.06018
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.06018

Abstract:
Context: Mutation Testing (MT) is an important tool in traditional Software
Engineering (SE) white-box testing. It aims to artificially inject faults in a
system to evaluate a test suite's capability to detect them, assuming that the
test suite defects finding capability will then translate to real faults. If MT
has long been used in SE, it is only recently that it started gaining the
attention of the Deep Learning (DL) community, with researchers adapting it to
improve the testability of DL models and improve the trustworthiness of DL
systems. Objective: If several techniques have been proposed for MT, most of
them neglected the stochasticity inherent to DL resulting from the training
phase. Even the latest MT approaches in DL, which propose to tackle MT through a
statistical approach, might give inconsistent results. Indeed, as their
statistic is based on a fixed set of sampled training instances, it can lead to
different results across instances set when results should be consistent for any
instance. Methods: In this work, we propose a Probabilistic Mutation Testing
(PMT) approach that alleviates the inconsistency problem and allows for a more
consistent decision on whether a mutant is killed or not. Results: We show that
PMT effectively allows a more consistent and informed decision on mutations
through evaluation using three models and eight mutation operators used in
previously proposed MT methods. We also analyze the trade-off between the
approximation error and the cost of our method, showing that relatively small
error can be achieved for a manageable cost. Conclusion: Our results showed the
limitation of current MT practices in DNN and the need to rethink them. We
believe PMT is the first step in that direction which effectively removes the
lack of consistency across test executions of previous methods caused by the
stochasticity of DNN training.
