Title: Metamorphic Testing for Web System Security
Authors: Nazanin Bayati Chaleshtari, Fabrizio Pastore, Arda Goknil, Lionel C. Briand
ID: 2208.09505
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.09505

Abstract:
Security testing aims at verifying that the software meets its security
properties. In modern Web systems, however, this often entails the verification
of the outputs generated when exercising the system with a very large set of
inputs. Full automation is thus required to lower costs and increase the
effectiveness of security testing. Unfortunately, to achieve such automation, in
addition to strategies for automatically deriving test inputs, we need to
address the oracle problem, which refers to the challenge, given an input for a
system, of distinguishing correct from incorrect behavior. In this paper, we
propose Metamorphic Security Testing for Web-interactions (MST-wi), a
metamorphic testing approach that integrates test input generation strategies
inspired by mutational fuzzing and alleviates the oracle problem in security
testing. It enables engineers to specify metamorphic relations (MRs) that
capture many security properties of Web systems. To facilitate the specification
of such MRs, we provide a domain-specific language accompanied by an Eclipse
editor. MST-wi automatically collects the input data and transforms the MRs into
executable Java code to automatically perform security testing. It automatically
tests Web systems to detect vulnerabilities based on the relations and collected
data. We provide a catalog of 76 system-agnostic MRs to automate security
testing in Web systems. It covers 39% of the OWASP security testing activities
not automated by state-of-the-art techniques; further, our MRs can automatically
discover 102 different types of vulnerabilities, which correspond to 45% of the
vulnerabilities due to violations of security design principles according to the
MITRE CWE database. We also define guidelines that enable test engineers to
improve the testability of the system under test with respect to our approach.
