Title: A Comparison of Reinforcement Learning Frameworks for Software Testing Tasks
Authors: Paulina Stevia Nouwou Mindom, Amin Nikanjam, Foutse Khomh
ID: 2208.12136
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.12136

Abstract:
Software testing activities scrutinize the artifacts and the behavior of a
software product to find possible defects and ensure that the product meets its
expected requirements. Recently, Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has been
successfully employed in complex testing tasks such as game testing, regression
testing, and test case prioritization to automate the process and provide
continuous adaptation. Practitioners can employ DRL by implementing from scratch
a DRL algorithm or using a DRL framework. DRL frameworks offer well-maintained
implemented state-of-the-art DRL algorithms to facilitate and speed up the
development of DRL applications. Developers have widely used these frameworks to
solve problems in various domains including software testing. However, to the
best of our knowledge, there is no study that empirically evaluates the
effectiveness and performance of implemented algorithms in DRL frameworks.
Moreover, some guidelines are lacking from the literature that would help
practitioners choose one DRL framework over another. In this paper, we
empirically investigate the applications of carefully selected DRL algorithms on
two important software testing tasks: test case prioritization in the context of
Continuous Integration (CI) and game testing. For the game testing task, we
conduct experiments on a simple game and use DRL algorithms to explore the game
to detect bugs. Results show that some of the selected DRL frameworks such as
Tensorforce outperform recent approaches in the literature. To prioritize test
cases, we run experiments on a CI environment where DRL algorithms from
different frameworks are used to rank the test cases. Our results show that the
performance difference between implemented algorithms in some cases is
considerable, motivating further investigation.
