Title: Towards Developing and Analysing Metric-Based Software Defect Severity Prediction Model
Authors: Umamaheswara Sharma B, Ravichandra Sadam
ID: 2210.04665
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.04665

Abstract:
In a critical software system, the testers have to spend an enormous amount of
time and effort to maintain the software due to the continuous occurrence of
defects. Among such defects, some severe defects may adversely affect the
software. To reduce the time and effort of a tester, many machine learning
models have been proposed in the literature, which use the documented defect
reports to automatically predict the severity of the defective software modules.
In contrast to the traditional approaches, in this work we propose a
metric-based software defect severity prediction (SDSP) model that uses a
self-training semi-supervised learning approach to classify the severity of the
defective software modules. The approach is constructed on a mixture of
unlabelled and labelled defect severity data. The self-training works on the
basis of a decision tree classifier to assign the pseudo-class labels to the
unlabelled instances. The predictions are promising since the self-training
successfully assigns the suitable class labels to the unlabelled instances. On
the other hand, numerous research studies have covered proposing prediction
approaches as well as the methodological aspects of defect severity prediction
models, the gap in estimating project attributes from the prediction model
remains unresolved. To bridge the gap, we propose five project specific measures
such as the Risk-Factor (RF), the Percent of Saved Budget (PSB), the Loss in the
Saved Budget (LSB), the Remaining Service Time (RST) and Gratuitous Service Time
(GST) to capture project outcomes from the predictions. Similar to the
traditional measures, these measures are also calculated from the observed
confusion matrix. These measures are used to analyse the impact that the
prediction model has on the software project.
