Title: MTVCraft: Tokenizing 4D Motion for Arbitrary Character Animation
Authors: Yanbo Ding, Xirui Hu, Zhizhi Guo, Yan Zhang, Xinrui Wang, Zhixiang He, Chi Zhang, Yali Wang, Xuelong Li
ID: 2505.10238
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.10238

Abstract:
Character image animation has rapidly advanced with the rise of digital humans. However, existing methods rely largely on 2D-rendered pose images for motion guidance, which limits generalization and discards essential 4D information for open-world animation. To address this, we propose MTVCraft (Motion Tokenization Video Crafter), the first framework that directly models raw 3D motion sequences (i.e., 4D motion) for character image animation. Specifically, we introduce 4DMoT (4D motion tokenizer) to quantize 3D motion sequences into 4D motion tokens. Compared to 2D-rendered pose images, 4D motion tokens offer more robust spatial-temporal cues and avoid strict pixel-level alignment between pose images and the character, enabling more flexible and disentangled control. Next, we introduce MV-DiT (Motion-aware Video DiT). By designing unique motion attention with 4D positional encodings, MV-DiT can effectively leverage motion tokens as 4D compact yet expressive context for character image animation in the complex 4D world. We implement MTVCraft on both CogVideoX-5B (small scale) and Wan-2.1-14B (large scale), demonstrating that our framework is easily scalable and can be applied to models of varying sizes. Experiments on the TikTok and Fashion benchmarks demonstrate our state-of-the-art performance. Moreover, powered by robust motion tokens, MTVCraft showcases unparalleled zero-shot generalization. It can animate arbitrary characters in full-body and half-body forms, and even non-human objects across diverse styles and scenarios. Hence, it marks a significant step forward in this field and opens a new direction for pose-guided video generation. Our project page is available at https://github.com/DINGYANB/MTVCrafter. A scaled version has been commercially deployed and is available at https://telestudio.teleagi.cn/generatevideo/creativeWorkshop.
