Title: Aliasing-Free Neural Audio Synthesis
Authors: Yicheng Gu, Junan Zhang, Chaoren Wang, Jerry Li, Zhizheng Wu, Lauri Juvela
ID: 2512.20211
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.20211

Abstract:
Neural vocoders and codecs reconstruct waveforms from acoustic representations, which directly impact the audio quality. Among existing methods, upsampling-based time-domain models are superior in both inference speed and synthesis quality, achieving state-of-the-art performance. Still, despite their success in producing perceptually natural sound, their synthesis fidelity remains limited due to the aliasing artifacts brought by the inadequately designed model architectures. In particular, the unconstrained nonlinear activation generates an infinite number of harmonics that exceed the Nyquist frequency, resulting in ``folded-back'' aliasing artifacts. The widely used upsampling layer, ConvTranspose, copies the mirrored low-frequency parts to fill the empty high-frequency region, resulting in ``mirrored'' aliasing artifacts. Meanwhile, the combination of its inherent periodicity and the mirrored DC bias also brings ``tonal artifact,'' resulting in constant-frequency ringing. This paper aims to solve these issues from a signal processing perspective. Specifically, we apply oversampling and anti-derivative anti-aliasing to the activation function to obtain its anti-aliased form, and replace the problematic ConvTranspose layer with resampling to avoid the ``tonal artifact'' and eliminate aliased components. Based on our proposed anti-aliased modules, we introduce Pupu-Vocoder and Pupu-Codec, and release high-quality pre-trained checkpoints to facilitate audio generation research. We build a test signal benchmark to illustrate the effectiveness of the anti-aliased modules, and conduct experiments on speech, singing voice, music, and audio to validate our proposed models. Experimental results confirm that our lightweight Pupu-Vocoder and Pupu-Codec models can easily outperform existing systems on singing voice, music, and audio, while achieving comparable performance on speech.
