Title: A Conceptual Framework for Web Development Projects Based on Project Management and Agile Development Principles
Authors: Martin Tomanek, Radim Cermak, Zdenek Smutny
ID: 1502.04297
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1502.04297

Abstract:
Companies implement different frameworks and best practices with the objective to improve the project management success rate and improve the business adaptability to the changing business environment. Project management framework (PRINCE2) and agile development framework (Scrum) proved in many cases that they can meet these objectives. However, both frameworks are based on different principles and the use of both frameworks together should be carefully considered. A large amount of money and effort has been invested by companies into establishing their project management environment and processes that follow the classical phased approach where requirements are defined upfront and fixed. But companies want to react more quickly to new global challenges and to the changing business environment. These business requirements then result in the failure of many running projects. Therefore there is a need to enhance the current project management environment so that it is more agile and adoptive to changes. The objective of this paper is to create a conceptual framework that aggregates principles and processes from both frameworks (PRINCE2 and Scrum) with emphasis on their use in web development projects. This paper will discuss the advantages and disadvantages of using the two abovementioned frameworks. Different groups of readers can benefit from the results of this paper. It will help corporate management to decide how a company should set up its own specific framework for managing agile product development projects. Project managers will have a better understanding of agile development principles and how it fits in the classic project management framework. Last but not least, it will help product developers to work in more agile ways and survive in the controlled and complex project environment.
