Title: Digital Storytelling as an Emergent Method for Social Research and Practice
Authors: Aline Gubrium, K. C. Nat Turner
ID: openalex.W2098876081
URL: https://works.bepress.com/aline_gubrium/5

Media production contains expanded possibilities for multimodal representation,
shared authorship, and interactivity, and with that new methods for doing
research on a range of subjects in a variety of disciplines from education to
public health. Kress (2003) argues the shift from word to image presents new
possibilities for communication and representation that may have far-reaching
cognitive, social, technological, and economic consequences that deserve more
theorizing and study. The concept of multimodal media production (MMP) explains
the myriad of modalities people use to understand the world they live in,
express themselves, be entertained, and defend themselves, including
documentaries, digital stories, hip hop music, digital video poetry, music
videos, computer games, public service announcements, youth radio, web sites,
blogs, wikis, and others (Turner, 2008). Outside the school setting, people use
MMP as a way to engage with their everyday life experiences. These technologies
are no longer separate from us; they are ubiquitous to the ways we now live our
lives. For any social research project, it is necessary to understand how people
are learning and making meaning of their lives. Increasingly, the public is
using MMP to publicly document, comment upon, and create their own meaning of
events around them. This was trenchantly demonstrated through user-generated
content covering the case of Oscar Grant. Oscar Grant was a young man living in
Oakland, California who was assassinated by a police offi cer while coming home
on the Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART), early in the morning on New Year’s Day
2009. What was particularly remarkable about this incident was that so many
people photographed and video recorded the event, thereby publicly documenting
this to record police malfeasance. Within hours of the event, raw footage of the
murder, as well as commentary on the raw footage, was posted on YouTube. What is
so striking about this example is that media production was not just constructed
online. As a form of popular social research and activism, people also worked
“off-line,” pulling a variety of clips, both user-generated and from the mass
media, produced about this event as elicitation materials for conducting
interviews with “experts,” such as community activists. These clips were also
used to draw upon these resources to create various
