Title: History, mystery and chemistry of eroticism: Emphasis on sexual health and dysfunction
Authors: TS Sathyanarayana Rao, M. R. Asha, Gavirangappa Hithamani, R Rashmi, KH Basavaraj
ID: openalex.W2121497877
URL: https://doi.org/10.4103/0019-5545.49457

INTRODUCTION The concept of ‘Mind’ as the functional element of ‘Self’ (Soul)
has found a mention in the ‘Vedas’, the earliest known scriptures of human
civilization. In Rigveda, Yajurveda and Atharvana veda, various aspects of the
mind, emotions and mental illness and prevention of mental disorders have been
elegantly described. Upanishads give an account of various states of mind,
theories of perception, thought and memory. ‘The Bhagavadgita’ is well known as
the essence of wisdom” contained in Vedas and Upanishads and Lord Krishna, the
first psychotherapist, who modified and simplified the knowledge in a form
easily understandable by common man. Vatsyayana's classic work “Kamasutra”
(Aphorisms of love) includes the three pillars of the Hindu religion “Dharma”,
“Artha” and “Kama” representing religious duty, worldly welfare and sensual
aspects of life respectively. The main theme here appears to be the expression
of Indian attitude toward sex as a central and natural component of Indian
psyche and life.[1] Kalyanamalla, (the author of “Ananga Ranga”, a famous
Sanskrit work) is said to have said that “all of you who read this book shall
know how delicious an instrument is woman, who is capable of giving the divinist
pleasures”. In “The Tao of Love and Sex: The ancient Chinese way to ecstasy”,
specific concepts in the Taoist approach to eroticism have been described in
detail. A strong emphasis on female satisfaction is a key feature of the Tao of
loving, achieved only through a proper balance and harmony of the forces of Yin
(female) and Yang (male), the opposites in the cosmic scheme of the universe. As
expounded by Chang, the Tao of loving is an explanation of the advice extended
by various authorities in classical works on Taoism, that considered love making
as part of the natural order of life.[2] “The Perfumed Garden”, by Sheikh
Nafzawi,[3] is the best known example of a classic Islamic sex manual. In this
16th century guide, what people of that time thought were the most satisfactory
characteristics of lovers and love making, have been poetically and colorfully
described. Lajjā snēhaha swaramadhurathā buddhayā yauvvanashreehi Kanthāsangaha
swajanasamathā dhukhahānirvilāsaha I Dharma shāsthram suragurumathihi
shouchmāchārachinthā Poornē sarvē jatharapitharē prāninām sambhavanthi II
Panchathanthra Shyness, friendship, melodious voice, intellect, brilliance of
youth, enjoying the sensuality of women, equanimity within the species, absence
of sorrow/misery, carnal pleasure, religion, scriptures, intelligence of
Brihaspathi (the teacher of Gods/Devathas), hygiene, concern about good behavior
– all these occur only when the creatures' stomach is full. This elegant
Subhashitha from Vishnusharma's Panchathanthra clearly indicates the necessity
of appropriate and adequate food/nutrition, a requisite for having the right
mindset and power for optimum sexual performance. In modern times, Abraham
Maslow's model of “Hierarchy of Needs” draws a parallel, emphasizing the key
role played by nutrition in human sexuality. Ayurveda is an ancient system of
health care, originating in India, providing precise guidelines to protect
“life”. This includes healthy living along with preventive and therapeutic
measures related to physical, mental, social and spiritual harmony. In Aurveda,
there's a systematic description of medicine or therapy called “Vajikarana” or
“Virility Therapy” by which the man becomes capable of copulating with the
woman. It also aids in nourishing the body of the person. According to
Charaka[4] (author of “Charaka Samhitha”, an ancient ayurvedic text on Internal
Medicine), one of the principal contributors to the art and science of Ayurveda,
these medicines are said to give one the strength and potency of a horse by
increasing the quantity and quality of semen, sperm count and sperm motility.
The person who takes these aphrodisiacs is claimed to get erection for a longer
duration. Charaka contends that the possible causes of decreased libido are (a)
impotency by birth, (b) Veeryaavarodha - obstruction of semen as a consequence
of controlling sexual urges for longer duration (c) Shukra kshaya - decrease in
quantity of semen due to overindulgence in sexual activities. This may
eventually lead to Clibya (impotency) if Vajikara dravyas (Libido enhancers) are
not consumed by such persons regularly and (d) consumption of spicy, salty and
hot food that increase pitta and destroys Shukra (semen).[4] Vajikarana includes
oleation, purification, decoction enema and lubricating enema. Foods suggested
which facilitate this therapy are milk, meat soup and boiled rice along with
ghee, oil, meat juice, sugar and honey. Emphasis is placed on relaxed, cheerful,
contented mindset.[4] In an interesting study on the dietary pattern of field
crickets Teleogryllus commodus, Maklakov et al,[5] reported that longevity in
both female and male were maximized on a low-protein and high-carbohydrate diet,
while their lifetime reproductive performances were maximized in a different way
in their nutrient intake pattern. It was also observed that these creatures
displayed sex-specific dietary preferences that boosted their reproductive
performance. The authors concluded that sexes face constraints in their ability
to reach their sex-specific dietary optima by the shared biology of food choice.
This sexual dilemma over diet optimization may be a vital factor that connects
the intricacies of nutrition and reproduction to aging and longevity. The origin
of eroticism can be traced to different psychosexual developmental stages, as
propounded by Sigmund Freud, the founder of Psychoanalytical theory. In the oral
stage, states of tension lead to a seeking for oral gratification, typified by
quiescence at the end of nursing. This consists of the wish to be satiated and
to reach that state of relaxation occurring at the end of sucking just before
sleep sets in. Libidinal needs are thought to be predominant in the early parts
of oral phase while they are mingled with more aggressive components later on,
marked by intensification of aggressive drives combined with libidinal
components in sadistic impulses. In the anal stage, eroticism refers to the
sexual pleasure in anal functioning. In this phase, object cathexis of all
libidinal energies is primarily autoerotic. The next in the sequence, the
phallic stage is characterized by a primary focus of interest, stimulation and
excitement in the genital area. This is associated with an increase in genital
masturbation accompanied by predominantly unconscious fantasies of sexual
involvement with parent of the opposite sex. The last one, genital stage, leads
to an intensification of drives, particularly libidinal ones, wherein the
psychological maturation of genital (sexual) functioning systems and
accompanying normal systems occurs. According to Freud, there are two instincts
in “id” (the unconscious part of human psyche) – “Eros” and “Thanatos” or “Life”
and “Death” instincts. Eros, libido or sexual energy is “Life integrating
force”. When Freud refers to “Sex”, it does not necessarily denote somatic,
sensual pleasures, but love, affection, friendship and other related non-sexual
expressions. In a thought provoking study on children in foster homes, Yates[6]
reports that not all children involved in incest are necessarily passive,
unwilling victims. On the contrary, they may find such experiences and
relationships gratifying. With continued intense genital and extragenital
stimulation, in all probability, they become highly erotic. This over mature
responsiveness can be considered as learned behavior, which is self-reinforcing
and hard to alter. Lack of experience and unavailability of role models are
ascribed to inability of the children to differentiate between affectionate
touch and sensual touch. The realm of erotic arts encompasses expressions of
sexual themes specifically related to the emotions and/or justified on aesthetic
grounds. There have been countless instances of the artistic manifestations of
eroticism in sculpture, painting, photography, drawing, film, literature and
performing arts. The (in) famous concept of “Femme Fatale” depicts woman as the
one who lures men into danger, destruction and even death by means of
exceedingly empting seductive charm. This image evolved in the 19th century to
become a stereotype in the 20th century. Although this concept had been created
“by men who, in all probability, felt threatened by the escape of women from
male dominance to much longed for freedom”, these images appear to be
representative of “Female liberation from male domination” and as “Rejection of
maternity” and “Female control of her own sexuality and body”. Today's man is
under pressure to change. He is told to get in touch with his feminine (softer)
side, encouraged to display his more caring nature. A woman or man is not born a
woman or man, but is made into one by socio-cultural conditioning. Other factors
playing a crucial role shaping human sexuality are neuroendocrinal, dietary and
psychosocial in nature.[7] Men, on average, are estimated to have 400% more
erotic fantasies than women. Sex is one area where women and men are attracted
to each other most intimately but are driven by motives that are worlds apart.
She longs for emotional warmth and is aroused slowly while he craves passionate
novelty and is aroused pretty fast.[7] Harmones have been proved to be powerful
engineers of brain and behavior. It has been observed that male have higher
arousal threshold and women and men react very differently to stimuli. The male
brain needs more extreme signals, stronger and intense stimulus and it craves
the stimulus of adventure.[8] Consequently, males are more likely to indulge in
dangerous risk-taking and impulsive action. High testosterone levels are
associated with impatience, irritability and low ‘Frustration Tolerance’.[9] The
sexual drive in both women and men is influenced by testosterone, the hormone
which men have 1000% more than women.[10] This implies that, the higher the
testosterone levels in an individual, the more intense his sexual urge. During
menstrual cycle in women, the testosterone levels peak just as the egg is
produced. If her testosterone levels are high during this peak, her motivation
for sex is also high throughout the cycle. Vasopressin and oxytocin also play an
role in the social and sexual behavior of higher when found in levels in sexual
and while in in the males sexual Vasopressin and oxytocin display differently in
men and women. During the male which the that it a key role in the sexual On the
contrary, if this is through means in the her sexual and caring behavior in the
female while it in the providing and is in during This of oxytocin in the male
is said to have been for the sexual of of the of is also claimed to the behavior
and his affectionate his is the for the testosterone for and the for feminine in
women. is for the proper and functioning of all the in the In healthy the in the
of testosterone is the of into a hormone called This is next to or before in a
to It is more and more these that from on the health of has a on the A study by
at the for at the of that low lead to and and made people The between has been
by et who that a high of and a low of high are factors for were by the of the
role of in the of has been as an factor in and are as good of According to a
study from to men with normal with high pressure have low levels of
testosterone, and indulge in sex much high or high pressure leads to of the
which in to the in the and High pressure and high levels testosterone, which as
factors for men with low men are at for This implies that man his levels of and
the two causes of as well as play a role in the between and the in the which the
system sexual other with the ability to before of in the brain that a be and
while the The of in the brain in various of in the levels of in men and women in
the of in The to is suggested to be a for the increase in the of reproductive
from the such as and and from the dietary such as found in most in are known to
on the male and female reproductive The of is vital in the where are When these
are by an they which in the of are natural a of the which give a of This the of
sexual It has been known that higher levels of in the brain in sexual in males
his performing the opposite observed that the of between men and women of
experience seeking that while men are high on the more of women are just as to
experiences through the and as This on male with sexual their female and The
that play a key role in erotic and sensual the and touch and but vital is the of
to the of the which as sexual to other of the are the most and natural sexual
such component in the of as a form of which the women women can is their natural
The in the the of testosterone levels in the males an The as for sexual
functioning. When of these the most is may be as the in the for sexual or in the
ability to of which is the of sex by both man and woman in a is In it may be by
psychosexual and while in the may be According to a by et The most common in of
women are of sexual interest, and inability to experience In of the most
reported were and of sexual and reported that may to of sexual It has been known
that sexual arousal in both men and women on levels of The of erection has been
in of sexual is known to be the principal of erection from of by et a in that
relaxation is by a of This appears to be an for of female is a from relaxation
of of and of The of with and sexual stimulation in from the brain to the This
leads to of the central of the which in the to the the the of the and and
increase in the of in the relaxation of the and of the and of the the by of the
called male is the inability to or an erection for sexual of this with and in is
to by in to the or in decreased ability of the to to and are of the associated
that the system such as can also lead to The female of is female sexual arousal
known as It is the absence of sexual arousal and a marked to most or all of
erotic stimuli. is the most male sexual et reported that of men with had low
testosterone, and a high of with a primary of had body needs proper to in the
three – physical, mental and When the balance of brain is various such as which
have on sexual the brain crucial for in the are made from which through a diet
can to the for and healthy functioning of the On the other good nutrition can in
through good quality food balance in the can have a on sex brain energy and have
been found to have as they are and can to the are to as The has in the of love,
on of the common to with their associated health are The the the in on the to
male are a high in and the as well as of healthy and of and the that can the of
to a also the and that are to when having sex. It and energy for of may also
work as an to the and that can give the to sexual the male hormone that is to
sexual arousal in women. is said to be through and as a that women The author
states that to a stimulation of the but is also to be or even The are said to
have the of this by to the of the of natural a of the and the which in the of
the brain and during is to in of and also a key component of the known to a of
relaxation and in to the that arousal and in women and is into in the body which
and in the of and and are as well known for in It is also to and have been by
that has found it to increase the libido of both male and female This is due to
the it consists that the female hormone This is the has been as a This has been
thought of as an and an is to the of the female sex have and are one of the A
mention of are made in the and to their are reported to be and the ancient as
and associated with love and A in is the of as by at as a of This is to be an
and said to sexual claimed in love and men has that it has such as and and is a
good of a that aids the body and the female sex have suggested that this may
also testosterone levels in the the hormone for sex drive and in both women and
In for testosterone as well as other and This has been in ancient for love and
has that the is particularly In a study by the of the and and in was found to to
the male by In it is also reported to be particularly to women. Love in the and
for This has been as an and highly by Chinese women. It has been a common in
India, to with with sugar this as it has been observed to increase behavior in
of can be and that are also natural of which are can have and appropriate
associated with most and has an role in sexual In the of includes in sexual
maturation and and and In a study on men under for by it was found that when was
to the in adequate to the levels between and in the potency of of the This was
accompanied by an increase in testosterone and hormone levels in to normal This
that may be a of sexual in of study on male with that in higher levels of
testosterone and sperm In a study on of factors in it was found that of the had
of than It was suggested that of be an which the people to and of possible
factors for The concluded that sexual and When measures were to the was observed
in men with et that is common it is it the of the classic of that men who
reported their before were with during men with early were more likely to during
the than were with very good In in this in a of the authors observed that was
associated with a higher of This study clearly indicates is not just but has
that if is not the health in of and on health be on is to in with There is that
who not by having sexual This concept leads to in and in their that health but
can a psychological is common in occurring as a of the illness but by to
psychological factors and over this study by that on and diet, sexual life and
is the factor for is a If is not it is likely factor for have to in who in life
which their sexual life factors play a role in and prevention of in are known to
sexual functioning in were made in a study on women the between body of body and
sexual The that aspects of sexuality in women with sexual on the body or can it
pressure and to a of When they are people to and in that also men at higher for
The brain is the control in the of an If the of the brain for the to the or it
by that the in the and the natural that causes an when the for is a illness or
most men with and all men that their is women can to be even when they are of or
women can arousal and even and it is likely that men can the On the other it is
for a man to an is and such experiences can the very of and for by women of
arousal and for of their or as a to the male may lead to and of libidinal energy
in women, in and of with psychological of psychological such as and even may It
is that has a on sexual health and on the quality of The of relaxation is the
key factor have that or a of factors such as controlling a healthy diet
regularly and and can decrease the of that healthy life such as these for
primary prevention of the of sexual at all The such as and other of the stage
for with their of to for have that when are of their ones, of the brain with a
high of for are In to was by images of the of these which suggested that the
brain pattern for love for sexual of and This pattern and the the of the
emotions that in one or both may drive to men that there is a of in in life body
image in the and may a woman to for satisfaction and the have time to their good
and their Other factors for in this to of opposite sex and to such as and The of
sexual is very of and psychological This field was by the for as it was thought
not to be associated with the it also a have that brain in to and even between
to the brain can facilitate functioning components of on the of emotional well
of the to is that they may but they also the of and are emotions and to and are
what optimum life are as the dietary In to relaxation and spiritual play a role
in the balance in brain and It takes more than the of sensuality of and of to
reach the of sexual – the factor adequate healthy attitude sex last but not the
the of
