Title: Discipline or Punish? Some Suggestions for School Policy and Teacher Practice
Authors: K. Wayne Yang
ID: openalex.W154802324
URL: https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8ss5t567

Focus on Policy Discipline or Punish? Some Suggestions for School Policy and
Teacher Practice D Copyright © 2009 by the National Council of Teachers of
English. All rights reserved. No. 1 ● September 2009 I received an attendance
book and a small stack of pink referrals at my fi rst teaching assignment P ART
1: P UNISHMENT Vol. 87 in Oakland, California, over 16 years ago. I had no
classroom, no textbooks, and otherwise no materials besides a box of copy paper.
I wrote my fi rst referral sometime in the middle of fall, after an incident
that has long passed from my mem- ory. I remember students telling me, “Send her
to the offi ce.” It seemed reasonable that the school administration might have
something useful to say to the student, so I fi lled out the pink form, tearing
off a carbonless copy for myself. I quickly learned that this was the poorest
advice you can give to a new teacher struggling with classroom culture and
her/his own authority within it. Stu- dents typically return from referrals or
other insti- tutionalized, depersonalized forms of retribution with the
conviction that they were wrongfully punished and that the teacher is going to
fail them. Aside from returning to the classroom resentful and unmotivated, they
are, at best, momentarily threatened into submission or, at worst, destined to
become push-outs, not drop-outs (Fine, 1991); such an incident forces their
peers to live with the violence of their erasure from the school commu- nity,
perhaps affecting their attitude toward school permanently. Our referral slips
were pink, triplicate, 3 × 5 forms with one space for teachers to write up
student misbehavior and another space for the administrator; that space had one
word: “disposi- tion.” At fi rst, I thought this would be where the dean
described the student’s “mood or tempera- ment” (dictionary defi nition #1)
after a thoughtful counseling session, or perhaps her “inclination” (dictionary
defi nition #2) to return to class. What disposition actually meant in the
school context was the “arranging or placing of things in their proper place”
(dictionary defi nition # 3), i.e., plac- ing the student in detention, in a
parent confer- ence, in suspension, in expulsion hearings, or in police custody.
What I learned from this experience is that dis- position as “disposal” is
simply a record of the Language Arts ● iscipline, according to Freire (1998, p.
86), is a necessary condition for effective action in the social world. “True
discipline does not exist in the muteness of those who have been silenced but in
the stirrings of those who have been challenged, in the doubt of those who have
been prodded, and in the hopes of those who have been awakened” (Freire, 1998,
p. 86). According to Foucault (1977/1995), discipline is a repressive operation
by which individuals are seasoned into productive labor, i.e., bodies for
capitalism. It is “a policy of coercions that act upon the body, a calcu- lated
manipulation of its elements, its gestures, its behavior . . . . Thus discipline
produces subjected and practiced bodies, ‘docile’ bodies” (Foucault, 1995, p.
138). Somewhere between Freire and Fou- cault lies the work of those of us who
dare to teach. This article seeks to restore a counter-narrative of discipline
as distinct from punishment. Punishment is retribution for an offense, an
exclusionary act by which students are removed from the opportunity to learn; it
is harm infl icted by an external agent as a mechanism through which outside
regulation becomes internalized subjectivity. Too often, this is the rubric from
which we speak of classroom man- agement and school policies that include deten-
tions, suspensions, and expulsions. By contrast, discipline is an act of
rigorous physical or mental training, a practice of will that can lead
paradoxically to docile compliance or emancipatory possibilities. If we think of
any challenging endeavor in athleticism, art, perfor- mance, or work, then we
know that there is a fi ne line between authoritarianism and rigorous cre-
ativity. This article is concerned with discipline as praxis—its transformative
possibility—and by what methodology it may be found, studied, and nurtured in
classrooms and schools. Focus on Policy K. Wayne Yang
