Title: We do this for the next child: a mother's phenomenological auto narrative inquiry into experiencing her children's schools
Authors: Patricia Marian Hibbitts
ID: openalex.W195984640
URL: http://summit.sfu.ca/item/9386

This auto narrative study examined the phenomenon of a mother’s experience with
the Kindergarten to Grade 12 school system. The narrative consisted of forty-
eight vignettes in which the author recalled when she interacted with educators
in her three children’s schools between 1985 and 2004. It took place in four
Canadian provincial jurisdictions (Ontario, Quebec, Newfoundland, and British
Columbia) and in six elementary schools, two junior secondary schools, and five
secondary schools. Some schools were public schools and some were Catholic or
Separate schools. One of the children was diagnosed as having Attention Deficit
Disorder. Two of the children were assigned Individualized Education Plans. The
narrative was analyzed utilizing hermeneutic phenomenology as outlined by Max
van Manen in Researching Lived Experience (1990). The analysis yielded seven
themes: communications, cultural dissonance, expectations, otherness,
professionalism, rage, and silencing. The study revealed that communications
between school and the mother centred on events and behaviours that were
problematic for the school. Cultural dissonance arose because of the differences
between the family and the regional cultures in which they lived. In addition,
the family adjusted its own culture because of the presence of an Attention
Deficit Disorder child. The mother’s expectation of her experience of her
children’s schools began as hope which was replaced by despair. The mother began
to see herself as ‘other’ and to a certain extent ‘otherness’ was present in the
children. Teachers defined themselves as professionals and were unwilling to
value the information that could have been provided by the mother. Because of
the actions of the schools in excluding him and in extending his sense of
otherness, one of the children developed a deeply held sense of rage. The mother
was actively silenced by schools but also passively silenced herself. The
central focus for this study was to identify the experience that one mother had
of her children’s schooling. The significance of the study lies in the richness
of the findings and their thematic interpretations. These provide reflective
opportunities for other parents facing similar challenges and a chance for
teachers and school administrators to engage in the life of a mother.
