Title: Interpreting Silence and Voice in Maxine Hong Kingston´s The Woman Warrior: Memoirs of A Girlhood Among Ghosts
Authors: Sun Shuang
ID: openalex.W181716793
URL: https://trepo.tuni.fi/handle/10024/80887

In my thesis I examine how Maxine Hong Kingston depicts a young girl's tough
search for self-identity in her book The Woman Warrior: Memoirs of A Girlhood
Among Ghosts (1975). The thesis aims at interpreting the themes of silence and
voice in Kingston's book, especially women's silence and voice. Written as a
girl's childhood experience, The Woman Warrior recounts the life experience of
Maxine Hong Kingston, a Chinese American woman who was born in the United States
and grew up in the Chinatown in Stockton, California. Like many other children
of immigrants, Kingston experienced adolescent turmoil and rebellion,
vacillating between her inherited Chinese culture and traditions and modern
American culture and values. Thus in her first book, The Woman Warrior, Kingston
recalls in the memories of her childhood the struggle to reconcile her Chinese
and American identities as a second generation Chinese American. Furthermore,
through this book, Kingston also explores the lives and struggles of other
Chinese women who were born and lived in China, or who immigrated to the United
States, as well as the lives of their children.&#13;\n&#13;\nDuring the past 30
years, a great number of articles and books have been written on Kingston and
The Woman Warrior. Most of the critics praise Kingston's contribution to the
formation of a new Chinese American identity for women who were long oppressed
by Chinese patriarchal tradition. In addition, her skill of storytelling is said
to continue the Chinese art of "talk story", which actually advances the oral
traditions of literature into a written treasure. At the same time, The Woman
Warrior has also received negative reviews concerning autobiographical accuracy,
cultural authenticity, and ethnic representativeness (Yuan 2001, 1). In the
theoretical section of the thesis, I firstly review briefly the development of
Chinese American literature in order to introduce a context for Kingston's The
Woman Warrior. Secondly, as genre and feminism are the key issues in the debates
on The Woman Warrior and central to my research question, I explore the related
theories on autobiographical writing and Asian American
Feminism.&#13;\n&#13;\nIn the first analytical chapter, Chapter three, I first
analyse the meaning of silence as a reflection of early Chinese immigrants and
their community. Silence illustrates the situation of the entire Chinese
American community in American history. Kingston describes the silence of
Chinese immigrants in the US and their voiceless lives because of hard work and
unfair treatment, and she writes about people who have been deliberately
neglected by the mainstream society over a long period due to sociopolitical
factors. Second, I focus on the silence of two individual characters - No-name
Woman and Moon Orchid: silence can be seen as a symbol of female victimization
in patriarchal Chinese culture and society and also in modern American society.
Thus, silence can be interpreted as a speechless revolt of a woman against the
patriarchal society.&#13;\n&#13;\nIn the second analytical chapter, Chapter
four, I interpret the theme of voice in The Woman Warrior and examine its
different forms, as voice can be articulation, speaking and expressing one's own
opinions, even talk-stories and oral literature which carry the Chinese classic
and tradition. In particular, voice represents the feminist awareness of Chinese
American women, since feminism, as traditionally understood, is speaking up,
demanding women's rights, refusing to be looked down upon, which is the opposite
of silence. Kingston portrays the voices of Chinese American women in the book,
and, furthermore, these voices take different forms; forms which do not only
include articulation and speaking up, but also refer to oral literature,
writing, and literary creation, which use words as weapon to fight for women's
rights. Voice can therefore be interpreted as writing and even rewriting classic
literature in order to deliver a new voice.&#13;\n&#13;\nTo conclude, through
the interpretation of silence and voice in Kingston's work, it is clear that
Kingston has succeeded in creating many true Chinese women warriors, in the past
and the present. Her purpose is to change the traditional images of Chinese
women, to improve their social status and to rewrite Chinese women's history. By
writing, Kingston breaks the taboo on silence and rewrites Chinese American
female subjectivity in a way that transcends Chinese patriarchal tradition. Just
as Ts'ai Yen, her role model, who learns the barbarian's language and lyrics and
then creates a new song for her own people, Kingston masters the English
language, uses voice and pen as weapons creating new pages in American
literature, and gives the women warriors she writes about places in American
history and perhaps immortality. Furthermore, her book can be seen as a new
voice, which break the silence in the history of Chinese Americans and destroys
the Orientalist stereotypes of Chinese Americans as well as "claim[s] rights"
and "claim[s] America", which are the demands of the Chinese Americans for their
emerging sense of identity.&#13;\n&#13;\nAsiasanat:Maxine Hong Kingston, The
Woman Warrior, ethnic literature, Chinese American literature, immigrant,
autobiography, feminism, Asian American feminism, ethnic identity, cultural
identity, silence, voice, racism, Chinese culture, classic literature rewriting
