Title: Doing, being and becoming : young people's processes of subjectivation between categories of age
Authors: Mona‐Iren Hauge
ID: openalex.W2399911113
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10852/18565

This thesis explores and details the processes through which children constitute
and are constituted as adolescents. The papers presented in the thesis examine
how young people acquire a sense of themselves within categories of age and how
such processes call attention to the body. In doing so, the thesis attends to
the body in two ways; first, it illuminates the way young people conduct and
deploy their bodies when constituting themselves within and against categories
of age. Second, it explores how notions of the body that are embedded in
discourses of gender which prevail in contexts such as schools affect how young
people behave as well as how they are perceived by their surroundings.\nThe data
on which the papers are based consist of qualitative interviews collected as
part of a longitudinal study of the social transition between childhood and
adolescence among 32 children in a multicultural neighbourhood in Oslo, Norway.
All the participants were interviewed repeatedly, first through the course of
two years (between the ages of twelve and fourteen), new interviews being
conducted in their final year in secondary school (at the age of sixteen) and
finally some in their second year of upper secondary (at the age of eighteen).
The data on which the thesis is based consist of nearly 180 qualitative
interviews; all conducted over a period of seven years. In particular, the
papers address three overall research questions. The first question relates to
how intersecting categories such as gender, age, ethnicity and sexuality, as
embedded in discourses, influence possible ways of being and becoming as an
adolescent boy or girl. The second question concerns how young people use and
deploy their bodies when constituting themselves within discourses that address
such categories of identity.\nThe third question has to do with developmental
psychology and how feminist postvii structural theory and research provide
analytical framework for understanding the processes through which young people
become who they are. Drawing on perspectives from this theoretical field, the
papers in this thesis offer a way of understanding the processes through which
children and adolescents constitute themselves and are constituted as
adolescents. One of the arguments pursued in the importance of elaborating new
theoretical concepts and analytical tools to better account for the complexity
in processes often referred to as development. The papers in the thesis outline
a frame of knowledge that differs radically from the notions of development
proposed in conventional psychology which assert that human development is
manifested by the emergence of transformations, many of which are assumed to be
caused by biological maturation. The onsets of such transformations are often
assumed as occurring within time intervals referred to as categories of age.
Thus, age is posited as the chronological marker of the intervals in which
development, i.e., a particular transformation, is expected to occur. The result
of representations like these in which biology and age intersect, is that
adolescence is framed as merely a passage between childhood and adulthood. \nAll
the papers in the thesis attend to age by focusing on the body; how children and
adolescents perform, style and deploy their bodies and how notions of the body,
as embedded in discourse, affect ways of being and becoming of age. In different
ways, the papers illuminate how young people constitute and are constituted
within categories of age through practices on and with the body. The argument
pursued in the thesis is that to further knowledge of the processes through
which children acquire a sense of themselves as adolescents, the body, both as
notions embedded in discourse and as practice, needs to be the focus of inquiry.
