Title: Stories, ethics and the interpretation of meaning: Bearing witness to mothers' stories of their neonatal intensive care unit experience
Authors: Angela Chisum Blackburn
ID: openalex.W172964410
URL: https://aquila.usm.edu/dissertations/997

This study grounded in narrative perspectives was conducted to uncover mothers'
experience of having a baby in the Neonatal intensive Care Unit (NICU). The
purpose of this study was to describe and interpret mothers NICU experiences,
and to sensitize health care professionals about the importance of mothers'
personal experience stories. The NICU experience began with mothers' birth
experience or the incident that led up to her infant requiring care in the NICU
and her experience extended beyond the NICU with future concerns about the
health and wellbeing of her baby. Stories of mothers' experience were gleaned
from data generated from audio-taped interviews, photographs taken by families,
mothers' journals and mothers' NICU memorabilia. Four mothers participated in
the study and their interviews were transcribed verbatim and provided the
primary text for analysis. Watson's (1985) carative factors provided a
theoretical structure for studying and understanding mother's stories.
Accordingly, narratives provided a tentative foundation for caring in nursing.
Looking at narratives with carative factors in mind helped to delineate them and
their importance in helping a nurse to care for another person. Data analysis
was guided by narrative inquiry combining structural approaches of Labov and
Waletzsky (1967/1997), and Riessman (2008), adapted from Gee (2005). Analysis
also identified narrative features and transcendent themes drawing on approaches
outlined by Charon (2006). The first level of reflection identified three core
narratives: enchantment, disenchantment and re-enchantment stories. Enchantment
stories were stories mothers told about their hopes, dreams and ideals for their
first pregnancy, birth and baby. Disenchantment stories were stories that
mothers told when things didn't go as planned and babies required care in the
NICU. Re-enchantment stories were stories told by mothers about their attempts
to create normalcy in the chaos of the NICU. These stories are also about
mothers' efforts to create new ideals, hopes and dreams as they create memorable
moments and celebrate each new milestone. The second level of reflection
revealed descriptions of five narrative features and transcendent themes. The
first narrative feature of causality/contingency illuminated the following
themes: tears in the fabric of daily life, mourning life as imagined, questions
of why? and search for answers. The second narrative feature of temporality
illustrated the following themes: rollercoaster, waiting, baby jail or petting
zoo? The third narrative feature of singularity identified the following five
themes: tailored care, assembly line, desire for normality, burden of depression
and prior experience with illness and death. The fourth narrative feature of
intersubjectivity gleaned the subsequent themes: encounters with others, earned
trust, butterflies and curtains, protecting family and family support. The fifth
narrative feature of ethicality, revealed the following transcendent themes:
valued responsiveness, vulnerable aspects of life, demonstrating hope and faith
and desire to help others This research makes a case to heath care providers
that through narrative understanding, we can maintain a better balance between
the highly technological nature of the NICU and also achieve therapeutic
relationships with patients by embracing our duties toward individuals. Mothers'
stories have the potential to provide moral education, reminding care providers
who NICU mothers are, what concerns them and why certain care practices are
valuable. These care practices can help guide care providers in what to do next
and how to live now. Through narrative understandings, mothers' stories can help
sort out what makes some care practices better than others. Implication for
health care professionals in practice, education, healthcare policy and research
are described.
