Title: An Investigation of Scholar-Baller and Non Scholar-Baller Division I Football Student-Athletes' Academic, Athletic, Intrinsic Motivation and Athletic Identity.
Authors: Janet Rasmussen
ID: openalex.W178516080
URL: https://stars.library.ucf.edu/etd/3965

As less than 3 % of student-athletes go on to play sport professionally, it is
important that they are prepared for careers outside of athletics (Susanj &
Stewart, 2005). Many football student-athletes have low grade point averages and
graduation rates. Universities incorporate academic motivational programs to
help combat low academic performance. One unique program, Scholar-Baller,
utilizes popular culture within its curriculum to bridge the gap between
academics and athletics. This dissertation examined the differences between
Scholar-Baller and Non Scholar-Baller Division I football student-athletes'
motivation (academic, athletic, intrinsic) and athletic identity using
expectancy-value theory and self-affirmation theory as its framework. In
addition, the effect of race/ethnicity (African-American, White American and
Other race/ethnicity) and Scholar-Baller participation on Division I football
student-athletes' motivation (academic, athletic, intrinsic) and athletic
identity was examined. Expectancy-value theory defines motivation as both the
expectation of the student's belief about the final outcome of a task, and the
values the student gives to the task. A student either has a positive, negative,
or neutral expectation of the completed task's outcome (Williams, Anderson &
Winett, 2005; Xiang, McBRide & Bruene, 2006). This framework allows for
exploration of student athletes' academic expectations and values. Self-
affirmation theory explains that when students focus on important identities and
values, they can become less defensive towards threatening information.
Therefore, when receiving negative academic feedback, student-athletes using
self-affirmation techniques may be more confident, open-minded and receptive
towards the threatening information. Three instruments were used to collect
data. The Student-athletes' Motivation toward Sports and Academics Questionnaire
SAMSAQ) was used to assess academic and athletic motivation, while the Motivated
Strategies for Learning Questionnaire (MSLQ) was used to assess intrinsic
motivation towards academics. Lastly, the Athletic Identity Measurement Scale
(AIMS) was used to investigate athletic identity. Four universities (two
Scholar-Baller and two Non Scholar-Baller) were chosen for their similar
academic and athletic performance. Using the Statistical Package for the Social
Sciences: Graduate Pack 16 for Windows, a Multiple Analysis of Variance (MANOVA)
and Analyses of Variance (ANOVA) were run to determine if significant
differences exist between the Scholar-Baller and Non Scholar-Baller football
student-athletes' academic, athletic, intrinsic motivation and athletic
identity. These tests revealed that Scholar-Baller football student-athletes had
significantly lower academic and athletic motivation than Non Scholar-Baller
football student-athletes. Having low academic expectations and little value for
academics is consistent with student-athlete subculture. However, these findings
were in contrast to what was expected. In addition, Scholar-Baller football
student-athletes had significantly higher athletic identity than Non Scholar-
Baller football student-athletes.This finding is also consistent with the
literature on student-athletes. As student-athletes must be motivated
athletically to perform at intercollegiate sports, it is not surprising to find
high athletic identity among the Scholar-Baller football student-athletes. In
fact, studies have suggested that high athletic identity correlates with high
academic performance (Harrison, Stone, Shapiro, Yee, Boyd & Rullan, 2009;
Sellers, Chavous & Brown, 2001). One Scholar-Baller university in this study
reported higher grade point averages since the inception of the Scholar-Baller
program (2.37 in Fall 2004 to 2.68 in Spring 2006). Scholar-Baller curriculum
utilizes self-affirmation exercises to affirm student- athletes athletically and
influence more acceptance of academic criticism. Scholar-Baller football
student-athletes are more affirmed in their athletic role which may lead to
academic success. This dissertation also investigated differences between
Scholar-Baller and Non Scholar-Baller football student-athletes' academic,
athletic, intrinsic motivation and athletic identity in relation to
race/ethnicity. Three groups, comprised of African-American, White American and
Other race/ethnicity, were used to compare Scholar-Baller and Non Scholar-Baller
football student-athletes. No significant differences were found. However, it
was noted that Scholar-Baller African-American football student-athletes had
higher academic, athletic and intrinsic motivation than Scholar-Baller White
American football student-athletes. This finding is surprising given the
previous research indicating African-American student-athletes' low academic
motivation. As this dissertation investigated only differences between Scholar-
Baller and Non Scholar football student-athletes' motivation and identity,
further research needs to be done to further explicate these differences. Also,
athletic identity should be further investigated among football student-athletes
to determine its role in academic performance. Furthermore, given this study's
findings of higher academic and athletic motivation among African-American
Scholar-Baller football student-athletes, and its contrast to previous research,
further studies should be performed to further explicate these differences among
race/ethnicity. Qualitative research involving in-depth interviews and
longitudinal studies investigating motivation and athletic identity over time
should be performed.
