Title: From the Ribosome to the Spliceosome and Back Again
Authors: Christine Guthrie
ID: openalex.W2087731925
URL: https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.x109.080580

When invited to contribute to the Reflections series, I pondered what aspects of
my career I should focus on. Hoping to lay down a strong narrative arc, I have
chosen to link my earliest beginnings with RNA, as a graduate student studying
the ribosome, to my later adventures in what hence became known as “the RNA
World,” as a tenured professor studying the spliceosome. I believe that some of
my most unusual scientific insights have come from this particular path, and it
is those examples I have highlighted here. Given that these articles are
intentionally highly personal narratives, I want to ask at the outset for
forbearance from the many members of the RNA World community whose invaluable
contributions I have not been able to cite, given the length constraints, but
without which my own progress would not have been possible. When I went to the
University of Michigan in Ann Arbor as a freshman in 1962, I wanted to major in
biochemistry. When I found out there was no such major, I toyed with English.
(My mother was a writer.) I enjoyed the reading, but I resented being evaluated
for my personal, obviously subjective views in writing. When my essay on Moby
Dick came back covered with red ink and a large angry “C,” I decided I had had
it. I would pursue science, unassailable in its objectivity! (Or so I thought.)
I chose a major in zoology rather than biology, which spared me from having to
memorize long lists of plant names in Latin. However, in my senior year, I was
transfixed by a lecture in which it was revealed that someone had succeeded in
splitting a bacterial ribosome into several pieces and putting it back together
again, a biochemical tour de force. Yes, this is what I liked best of all. In a
remarkable coincidence, the next year found me sitting in the office of the very
man who had accomplished this feat, Masayasu Nomura. I had recently married my
high school sweetheart, and he was accepted only at a single medical school, the
University of Wisconsin, where I dutifully followed him. I had never thought
seriously about getting a Ph.D. Only three other girls in my high school class
had even gone to college. Along the way, however, my husband-to-be persuaded me
to consider trying for a Master's, so I had applied to graduate school in
Madison and been accepted. “I want to work on the ribosome,” I told Professor
Nomura. “What grades did you get in organic chemistry?” he parried. Hearing of
my 10 h of Cs (and ignoring my straight As in biology), he brusquely told me to
look elsewhere. When I persevered, he told me, “Girls can't do biochemistry.
They can't lift heavy rotors or spend long hours in the cold room.” “What can
they do?” I asked. “Genetics,” he said. As it turned out, I would have to wait
several years before a suitable ribosome genetics project was conceived. In the
interim, Nomura allowed me to do some experiments analyzing how ribosomes
initiated protein synthesis in vitro. This indeed entailed biochemistry. To
establish that the initiator tRNA bound first to the 30S not the 70S ribosome
required a complex labeling strategy utilizing radioactively (14C and tritium)
and density (15N and deuterium) labeled components. The experiments were
technically difficult and emotionally stressful. For example, because of the
high cost of “heavy water,” every drop of D2O had to be redistilled from the
growth medium for reuse. Eventually, I was able to show that the initiator tRNA
was found exclusively on hybrid (heavy/light) 70S ribosomes, i.e. which had to
have undergone prior initiation on 30S ribosomes. This work was published in
Nature in 1968 (1Guthrie C. Nomura M. Initiation of protein synthesis: a
critical test of the 30S subunit model..Nature. 1968; 219: 232-235Crossref
PubMed Scopus (54) Google Scholar). After that, I was definitely ready for some
genetics. During that time, the main focus of the rest of the lab had remained
the elusive search for ribosomal protein structure: function relationships.
Nomura believed that, when each protein was eventually purified, it could be
assigned a specific function by asking what happened to ribosome performance
when this single protein was omitted. Numerous male postdoctoral fellows put in
their long hours in the cold room, trying to achieve “total reconstitution” of
the ribosome. (The work I had heard about in Ann Arbor was, by comparison, only
“partial,” i.e. a soluble protein fraction could be split off from the
ribonucleoprotein (RNP) core particles in high salt and, after dialysis, etc.,
added back to the cores to regain activity.) For total reconstitution, a mixture
of 21 proteins of the 30S ribosomal subunit was combined with purified 16S rRNA,
yet despite repeated tries, no active ribosomes were produced. In what I
consider to this day a grand cosmic joke, the breakthrough came when Peter
Traub, a tenaciously driven German postdoctoral student, reasoned that, because
cells grow at physiological temperatures, ribosome reconstitution might in fact
require a temperature-dependent step. Out from the cold room he came. Indeed,
when heated to 40 °C, active 30S ribosomes were reconstituted! It was a great
day in the laboratory, but as more and more elegant experiments were carried out
to describe the in vitro biochemical pathway, the question loomed whether this
pathway had anything to do with biology. Thus was my genetics project finally
born. The reasoning was that if the process of ribosomal subunit assembly in
vivo was also temperature-dependent, should as I and to and high Indeed, I found
that some of in were ribosomal subunit at This required me to experiments of
cells to the were by In to only 30S and cells with unusual in the that found for
in vitro reconstitution without the (and revealed a in protein the specific in
my were never these experiments were to the of the in vitro pathway, with the
that ribosome assembly a temperature-dependent RNA C. Nomura M. on the assembly
of ribosomes in Scopus Google Scholar). The could not have been The was of and
the combined were three in the I was to be given this to as only a graduate
student, and I the before my had the a in the and I the was and I was invited to
a the next at University The ribosome was a for driven at the time, and in the
and was for me, of the were Nomura and Madison I had enjoyed from in the of and
he had invaluable to me as I to of the but it was not to to and Nomura me to the
In the of my was that I should my Ph.D. and that was I was by that it would be
to do in a Indeed, this became my major when I finally my own at the University
of in did I at the how were my from the ribosome,” and The of in was could it
For those of who had been in the of so in at a in this at the of PubMed Scopus
Google a and highly search for In published the that ribonucleoprotein particles
might the of the by of at the of RNA to at the in PubMed Scopus Google Scholar).
this was a highly the were at the time, I had been trying to the by which were
from a of genetics from the of bacterial by the by and at the in very a at I was
by the of this of to the of from if were it should be to by a and and the I was
that this would but I found from my in the It was out to me that only a of even
had to that the would be and to that in more was the fact that had to in when
with from with the The very fact that these could down from other the had been
to the high of a I had a that the of the rather the of the the best should be to
look for the I this on from of bacterial ribosomes. As I the to get at the of
had to been exclusively on the of the ribosomal This came from a strong that
only proteins could many ribosomal proteins could be in ribosome reconstitution
of followed the most for the of the RNA came from where it that the of bacterial
16S was The of these by and in C. of 16S ribosomal PubMed Scopus Google
persuaded me that the most from to yet when I my to to get at the of I was
Indeed, there was to me as I my for in from and were me to look for the In with
and I chose to focus on three for of of a and years of analyzing labeled on I
that other in that would be in very but even when I to there were only which
required a to be from the more of The was to if of these This entailed a of and
by long of the there had been the that might be from the of but I to that at the
of these was than I had but that the of my to be the most difficult of and I was
to and postdoctoral student, who finally In the lab was able to in that did
indeed have and, most for that these were by in to the large in C. by single
PubMed Scopus Google C. RNA is in PubMed Scopus Google Scholar). I was at this
in my I was by the fact that of the first of the to to to was the that of these
that could be only in no In finally found that cells for were To test the that
were with process given the of to the the only to that this was not more than
the single of at were by and even for me, that I my but I could not were the and
what in the were the of these the of the I was to a graduate student who had
been in genetics by to my by into the so on the of the of known were he a in
which the (and was from and the a cells to grow on a cells that were to the
could be as was known about the for to the and first he a that to a at of the
This work was published in in C. in the at the of the and PubMed Scopus Google
Scholar). if only had a In lab had recently in vitro and by the a which they the
The RNA with a complex in a PubMed Scopus Google Scholar). This to if of the
with this experiments carried out with on in lab at the of but the was and also
came to do a to but this was In the the was finally to and my was at finally
RNA, I the graduate student on it to some before the next came in with the that
was other than only of but in a of highly To he went on to the the which allowed
to the when cells were in in these cells as for C. with a is required for PubMed
Scopus Google Scholar). I was it would be a before could establish a with the
were by experiments had been in with who had the of into The was to a of into
which the prior to the the in vivo should with of the was which indeed a in a C.
of for the highly PubMed Scopus Google Scholar). RNA was which to also be When
this was were highly that the was that several other were from about the time,
had the remarkable that RNA a with high to the of as he to the RNA, he of to
other published the of what he to be a in in M. RNA from is large and to and
PubMed Scopus Google a highly to those who had the that were yet in with of as
which was not published of this would require of each as as of the function of
the of the In the I had been by the of the of large some that this RNA was
indeed but which had to because of its large It had been that a of the this was
as that was as no such could be found in however, it was that this the of in the
first of I was by the that a with to the because it required a single to be out
of I recently had been about the of the class because it had been that of this
class had the as it that, as with the ribosome, the might be elegant recently
had been published in which it was that the on a out of and that this was for
that, I had what to me the for the of the with the of the The of the was that
finally had in the to the of but with of was about out the to do a postdoctoral
but I to to do the in the and look for cells that could no grow on in a of the
and the were on should be only with the of in the and the the of the there were
many For example, can work only if the is not which is a when with a is of in
might a Indeed, examples of me on and could be and In the the the of the by I
was and could not wait to the when were at the but the of was by the of the a
senior of the “What are to of this can't have anything to do with It was of the
by most RNA and it did not that were rather than from in vitro biochemistry. The
was published in in C. of the in with the PubMed Scopus Google that the in in is
but with to the of the the to the it would be several more years and many more
experiments before the of was accepted. a that was indeed in of a and examples
in which the of was indeed is the for PubMed Scopus Google Scholar). In that but
the of could be without and, in that the could in fact C. can function in in
PubMed Scopus Google Scholar). To this it is what if the about In that a very
large RNA, was the of and, C. a with PubMed Scopus Google Scholar). the first
was in cells by in in a PubMed Scopus Google were by M. RNA is large and to
PubMed Scopus Google Scholar). for and it was to the of and specific for which
were In had been about for from the outset because of its unusual in The of the
it a and In a postdoctoral came to the had ribosomal as a graduate student and
was to to look at about which to was In for analyzing he on a in which he to in
the first followed by a in the a to the of several of he had only been in the
lab a time, he came to my office very to that there was very about the of “What
is I to anything that it was in the off the I if was to out to be on out that it
could be of unusual or that was with a RNA that in the had had of the and a it
had no to known had persuaded that it could be the to of and had a to Nature to
that When experiments that was with a RNA, that this was of that of and and had
found that these were with this were be and the RNA, To test this to a from by
this I was that would have to from I out how to the at in what turned out to be
the of the me of that it had not yet been out for and that I not such a but with
I down to the next of As it turned out, is the most highly in and in I have
thought how would have been if I had to my in I that my that could insights into
by was In published a of C. RNA is from to PubMed Scopus Google Scholar). In
this the of with with of for the that this was highly in of by that, the of in
from and the rest of the spliceosome. were by the fact that the most highly in
were those to the of were these what the is highly by and its at the of the RNA
To this of is by with which as When have been is by to into a active The was to
out the active of came to the lab as a highly day in I that would never could
every single in and me at my he carried out of and for on growth and found a of
in the most the he a in which of could with in of the these were there were
several of that to a The of the published in in was that the with as as with at
the of C. and a for the of the PubMed Scopus Google Scholar). The next year,
student in the that the with the the of which is with the This work was
published in in C. in that for the active PubMed Scopus Google (and with by and
of in PubMed Scopus Google and a of highly in RNA required for of the
spliceosome. the of these is the of active it the active and it is the of this
complex that I is the most of contributions to the of the RNA of the remained to
be with the my to to the for their had of these in but did not it as such for
many years to This with a for of a in the of carried out by a highly of
postdoctoral and C. of a with a PubMed Scopus Google Scholar). After many and a
single was that of the the allowed the of a that the by was for As a student,
became with out the of this protein and the the was a difficult but it
eventually to to out of the day in the of the that had a of to the the by this
link and the of published in in C. protein the of in PubMed Scopus Google
Scholar). a postdoctoral student with remarkable biochemical that the protein
was in fact a very was able to that the protein with the only was This work was
published in Nature in C. is that with the PubMed Scopus Google Scholar). year,
driven graduate student, a and that it also a As out in C. is a of the RNA
PubMed Scopus Google and into a as for members of this had in many other it was
that anything could about the would have could from other to test specific For
example, the best protein in was a RNA However, to show to me at the was the of
in back to the ribosome, which I had never in my or in my I was by the to the of
and in at the ribosomal on and had a in which it was that to the of such as
would have to be by This strategy would a would the would be the of such a would
on the for the the of this that the ribosome indeed such a and it was that the
performance could be by as as the of several ribosomal was highly to test the
that indeed as of the first the of for the that to the to the the in and the and
biochemical were the were the a for that had to a in which the was and that this
was in with In the this to and are the of the the more for the to the from
Indeed, found that the i.e. the to be in were published in in C. for by the of a
pathway for PubMed Scopus Google followed by a in C. the for in the of PubMed
Scopus Google in which that each in of in would for and were for to do by but
from several have the of this This and of the most and of many about these have
been about the and the of For example, might have that was a yet it was that the
protein was required for the As in without in prior to the step. of as a a
student, decided to test the of this a of from lab and for in To and the of
turned out to be about the of my ribosomal in C. of of the by of PubMed Google
that the by the proteins of RNA temperature-dependent The of this was by a
postdoctoral student who came to the lab from the of protein as a with Peter
thought to by but to do such he was by the genetics on him. I to a in these and
was when he came to my office several with a in and a in is a more than protein
he after that he a to a major in the time, the of most of the but of their the
other did some of the For example, from that be by at the before the first of a
to the a a and this into each of the and look for of the growth To my as it some
to get the of he the with and of and only The was to the in were at in vitro but
could be into by the This required and also that the could be by the that these
were in with as published in in C. RNA at the and the protein PubMed Scopus
Google he had succeeded in on a specific by that should be the in is that from
to of the to from was by for to to other it had each of the other could be as
was of the and a graduate student and elegant to test the that was required for
from as in in C. RNA in and the PubMed Scopus Google from cells to This the
question of how would be This turned into a a ribosomal and the most protein in
the and had their on the with at the or in they each for after this protein I
believed could of by After however, and the that they had that this protein
could with to the of had been to to these in in C. and RNA active a function for
at the core of the PubMed Scopus Google that function at the were by M. of with
at the PubMed Scopus Google Scholar). long in the as to whether might contribute
and as of this this a the a ribonucleoprotein PubMed Scopus Google Scholar). In
the a professor at the University of that by the of several for example, he
found that several could the of a of had to and particular to were the of in a
many of a postdoctoral in the had out several of the protein as a these he was
able to a and what the In with a postdoctoral student in the a to whether the or
of were by the of the as published year in Nature C. C. of by the the of PubMed
Scopus Google they that the was to the of to this was when the known to in
physiological This work as the first of a with a known RNA As so the this a of
In because and are how would the with the of the be work by when was a graduate
student in the lab by the the protein and carried out a to and other As in C. a
for the of the PubMed Scopus Google the highlighted strong the of with Given the
that a major that a of could with This recently been by elegant biochemical
experiments by a professor at the University of that the particular of the is
critical for the of The by a PubMed Scopus Google Scholar). to be by the of the
ribosome and the also by and For example, work that the of with a in to the of
its function in Given the by and I that the of a tRNA a in C. in the and PubMed
Scopus Google this is a are to because the that the assembly and are so
difficult to by have recently initiated a This been by a of Professor in the lab
(and my to the and have been able to the of assembly total out in the of at the
University of have found that the a large of the of these to be This as out in
this a of the of the which have long been to the pathway the function of is to
the to are the of the have is to of subunit in the ribosome, which in the or of
that the and the ribosome are to I my a yet more the I have been most by I have
found of that to about years I was able to a student, to consider the that the
of in a of would have for the of those In the of the ribosomal proteins protein
To test the that cells would to by the of ribosomal proteins at the of to of a
by postdoctoral in the which to the of and of in a single and were in their by
highly graduate student with in The was to cells the of a RNA at and the of and
by The were and As published in in M. C. in in to PubMed Scopus Google and that,
after of the of ribosomal protein is the is highly specific for this of is at to
the of this and of the ribosome and the spliceosome. As for I that, in my I to
have the back into the The Scholar). and I my to of the and postdoctoral fellows
been my to of did not in this It is my that, I have been able to the I so for at
the of my The been very difficult at and I my to the remarkable members of a of
who have to and every other for more than years and from University Scholar). I
to members of the RNA World in particular and and personal have me of my I by
the by the of and the which me a Professor of in
