Title: The thongs that bind : how Georgia Nicolson negotiates her identity as an adolescent girl
Authors: Kelli Decker Kidwell
ID: openalex.W1533518288
URL: 

In a series of novels by Louise Rennison, beginning with Angus, Thongs and Full-
frontal Snogging, female protagonist Georgia Nicolson tries on various articles
of clothing like thongs and bras and applies makeup like “lippy” and mascara, in
an attempt to find acceptance from her peer group. The Georgia series falls
within the framework of young adolescent literature, as well as in the category
known as “chick lit jr.” This narrative addresses issues of negotiating identity
and power; and it demonstrates the pervasive elements of both trying on gender
and consumerism as females move out of adolescence. This means that Georgia
merely reflects the culture she consumes; concurrently, however, she sees
herself as a casualty of consumerism and gender roles, realizing the “tyranny”
of elements of femininity. I argue that the emergence of chick lit and chick lit
jr. uphold debilitating notions of femininity and masculinity; at the same time,
however, chick lit succeeds in attracting many female readers by its humor and
levity—allowing these readers to identify, at least in part, with the characters
who are initiated into the role of female adolescent. Therefore the adolescent
females can empathize with a protagonist who shaves, waxes, wears bras, or
applies makeup, thus revealing the indoctrination of girls by a beauty culture
glorified in magazines, movies, and television shows—spread by other girls and
inherited often through mothers’ examples—into a world of consumerism and gender
expectations. Like the protagonists, the readers of chick lit and chick lit jr.
texts must also learn how to mediate their identity as young women. This means
that when an adolescent girl reads such books, she must learn to use language to
dissect, prod and constantly rewrite the existing constructs as it relates to
her quest for acceptance by male and female peers and adults as a “perfect”
female.
