Title: Spouses of persons with dementia: Attachment, loss and coping
Authors: Reidun Ingebretsen, Per Erik Solem
ID: openalex.W1590233006
URL: https://doi.org/10.5324/nje.v8i2.457

ABSTRACTThe purpose is to study how spouses of persons with dementia cope with
losses and caregiving tasks during thedementia process and how their coping is
related to the individual's and the couple's history of attachment. Thesample
consists of 28 couples where one of the spouses has dementia. The caregiving
spouses, aged 60-87, areinterviewed at an early stage of dementia and are
followed up every 6-9 months over a periode of three years.The life situation is
continually changing, and coping methods are repeatedly challenged. Coping with
lossesand readjustments are dependent upon their need of the partner to feel
safe. Different patterns of attachment behaviourare seen. Compulsive caregiving
spouses attend to their spouse beyond their needs. Spouses in anxiousattachment
often panic and try to fight back the symptoms of dementia. A pattern of
compulsive self-sufficiencymanifests itself as arguing or withdrawal from the
partner. Secure attachment makes it easier to accept thechanges, keep in contact
and care. To understand the strains and coping of the spouses, we need to
understandhow dementia triggers patterns of attachment behaviour. They need more
than information on dementia andtraining in handling various symptoms. They need
empathy and individually adapted interventions.INTRODUCTIONEmerging dementia
with gradual mental deterioriationand increasing dependency ending in death, is
frighteningto those involved, both to the person himself andto the family. The
new situation disturbes an establishedbalance in the relationship and interferes
withcommunication. Meaningful mutual contact and sharedmeaning is gradually
lost.In the book ‘Living in the Labyrinth’ Diana FrielMcGowin, who had received
a diagnosis of dementia,writes: ’My every molecule seems to scream out that Ido,
indeed, exist, and that existence must be valued bysomeone! Without someone to
walk this labyrinth bymy side, without the touch of a fellow traveller
whounderstands my need of self-worth, how can I endurethe rest of this uncharted
journey?’ (Cited after Kitwood1997, p. 15). This person is in desperate need ofa
secure attachment figure to recognize, help and guideher. In this paper we are
focusing on the situation ofthe fellow traveller, the chart reader; the
spouse.The burdens of family caregiving for persons withdementia are documented
in a great number of studies(Morris &amp; Morris 1993). The tasks of a fellow
travellerand navigator in the labyrinth of dementia are, not leastdue to strong
personal involvement, also hard toendure. Research does not reveal any clear and
simpleconclusions on how coping stategies, social support orprofessional
interventions may ease the burden (Zaritet al. 1986). By including attachment
theory in theframework of analysis, we hope to come closer tounderstanding
changing relationships and how burdensmay be eased.From an outside position it
is difficult to ascertainwhat the most heavy burdens are. A distinction has tobe
made between objective and subjective burden(Duijnstee 1992, Morris &amp; Morris
1993). The objectiveburden, often measured by severity of dementia symptoms,is
not strongly associated with subjective burdenas experienced by the caregiver
(George &amp; Gwyther1986, Zarit et al. 1986). ‘Over time the meaning givento a
stressor seems more important than its occurence’(Lévesque et al. 1998, p. 253).
When the goal of the effortsnot only is to give good care, but also to maintaina
relationship, burden may have to be measured bydifferent standards. Objective
burden, or elements ofobjective burden, may even be evaluated in positiveterms
by the caregiver (Farran et al. 1991, Grafström1994, Motenko 1989). Caregivers
may need elementsof ‘the burden’ in order to maintain attachment bondsor to
fulfill their obligations. Interventions to take suchburdens away, without
considering the underlyingneeds or goals, may interfere with the best interests
ofthe caregiver – and of the person with dementia.This article is based upon a
study with the purposeof finding
