Title: The archaeology of masculinity: the process of personal archaeology in the creative arts
Authors: Lindsay James Duncan
ID: openalex.W267619006
URL: https://ro.uow.edu.au/theses/934

Contemporary gender studies reveal the evolution of a plurality of masculinities
since World War Two. The associated social change surrounding masculinity has
demanded a re-evaluation of gender roles by Western men who, historically, have
not been encouraged to be introspective about their emotional development.
However, when compelled by circumstances to examine some of the forces which
have moulded their lives and which keep them in bondage they become aware that
the traditional values surrounding patriarchal politics, women, war, religion
and death are no longer adequate. A major factor in this inadequacy is that
traditional role models have been superseded by those projected by Hollywood and
the mass media.\nThe evolution of new role models has led to confusion and
uncertainty about the definition of masculinity and what it is to be a man. To
make sense of their personal identity and the construction of their masculinity
some men embark on a process of personal archaeology. This is the theme of the
research for The Archaeology of Masculinity which examines the heroic role
played by fathers and other men in boys' lives. The creative work and the
explication of it in the documentation deal with the broad issue of the
construction of masculinity by addressing the specific relationships between
incest and sexual abuse, dysfunctional father-son relations, and the construct
of sexual preference within a particular historical and cultural context. It
also reveals some of the unrealistic standards of unattainable masculine ideals
promoted in popular Western culture. The thesis is both autobiographical and
generalised and has been articulated in four exhibitions.\nCentral to the work
is an analysis of the therapeutic content of the creative process. To some
degree all art draws on the subconscious for inspiration. However,
autobiographical art specifically objectifies emotions and sub-conscious
feelings and is often self-revealing to the artist after the work is completed.
Such unveiling of repressed knowledge can be cathartic, and this dissertation
provides a case history where a fuller understanding of the effects of early
childhood trauma was reached through a process of creative therapy.
