Title: How Reliable are Test Numbers for Revealing the COVID-19 Ground Truth and Applying Interventions?
Authors: Aditya Gopalan, Himanshu Tyagi
ID: 2004.12782
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.12782

Abstract:
The number of confirmed cases of COVID-19 is often used as a proxy for the
actual number of ground truth COVID-19 infected cases in both public discourse
and policy making. However, the number of confirmed cases depends on the testing
policy, and it is important to understand how the number of positive cases
obtained using different testing policies reveals the unknown ground truth. We
develop an agent-based simulation framework in Python that can simulate various
testing policies as well as interventions such as lockdown based on them. The
interaction between the agents can take into account various communities and
mobility patterns. A distinguishing feature of our framework is the presence of
another `flu'-like illness with symptoms similar to COVID-19, that allows us to
model the noise in selecting the pool of patients to be tested. We instantiate
our model for the city of Bengaluru in India, using census data to distribute
agents geographically, and traffic flow mobility data to model long-distance
interactions and mixing. We use the simulation framework to compare the
performance of three testing policies: Random Symptomatic Testing (RST), Contact
Tracing (CT), and a new Location Based Testing policy (LBT). We observe that if
a sufficient fraction of symptomatic patients come out for testing, then RST can
capture the ground truth quite closely even with very few daily tests. However,
CT consistently captures more positive cases. Interestingly, our new LBT, which
is operationally less intensive than CT, gives performance that is comparable
with CT. In another direction, we compare the efficacy of these three testing
policies in enabling lockdown, and observe that CT flattens the ground truth
curve maximally, followed closely by LBT, and significantly better than RST.
