Title: Unsupervised Performance Analysis of 3D Face Alignment with a Statistically Robust Confidence Test
Authors: Mostafa Sadeghi, Xavier Alameda-Pineda, Radu Horaud
ID: 2004.06550
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.06550

Abstract:
This paper addresses the problem of analysing the performance of 3D face
alignment (3DFA), or facial landmark localization. This task is usually
supervised, based on annotated datasets. Nevertheless, in the particular case of
3DFA, the annotation process is rarely error-free, which strongly biases the
results. Alternatively, unsupervised performance analysis (UPA) is investigated.
The core ingredient of the proposed methodology is the robust estimation of the
rigid transformation between predicted landmarks and model landmarks. It is
shown that the rigid mapping thus computed is affected neither by non-rigid
facial deformations, due to variabilities in expression and in identity, nor by
landmark localization errors, due to various perturbations. The guiding idea is
to apply the estimated rotation, translation and scale to a set of predicted
landmarks in order to map them onto a mathematical home for the shape embedded
in these landmarks (including possible errors). UPA proceeds as follows: (i) 3D
landmarks are extracted from a 2D face using the 3DFA method under
investigation; (ii) these landmarks are rigidly mapped onto a canonical
(frontal) pose, and (iii) a statistically-robust confidence score is computed
for each landmark. This allows to assess whether the mapped landmarks lie inside
(inliers) or outside (outliers) a confidence volume. An experimental evaluation
protocol, that uses publicly available datasets and several 3DFA software
packages associated with published articles, is described in detail. The results
show that the proposed analysis is consistent with supervised metrics and that
it can be used to measure the accuracy of both predicted landmarks and of
automatically annotated 3DFA datasets, to detect errors and to eliminate them.
Source code and supplemental materials for this paper are publicly available at
https://team.inria.fr/robotlearn/upa3dfa/.
