Title: Employing Partial Least Squares Regression with Discriminant Analysis for Bug Prediction
Authors: Rudolf Ferenc, István Siket, Péter Hegedűs, Róbert Rajkó
ID: 2011.01214
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.01214

Abstract:
Forecasting defect proneness of source code has long been a major research
concern. Having an estimation of those parts of a software system that most
likely contain bugs may help focus testing efforts, reduce costs, and improve
product quality. Many prediction models and approaches have been introduced
during the past decades that try to forecast bugged code elements based on
static source code metrics, change and history metrics, or both. However, there
is still no universal best solution to this problem, as most suitable features
and models vary from dataset to dataset and depend on the context in which we
use them. Therefore, novel approaches and further studies on this topic are
highly necessary. In this paper, we employ a chemometric approach - Partial
Least Squares with Discriminant Analysis (PLS-DA) - for predicting bug prone
Classes in Java programs using static source code metrics. To our best
knowledge, PLS-DA has never been used before as a statistical approach in the
software maintenance domain for predicting software errors. In addition, we have
used rigorous statistical treatments including bootstrap resampling and
randomization (permutation) test, and evaluation for representing the software
engineering results. We show that our PLS-DA based prediction model achieves
superior performances compared to the state-of-the-art approaches (i.e.
F-measure of 0.44-0.47 at 90% confidence level) when no data re-sampling applied
and comparable to others when applying up-sampling on the largest open bug
dataset, while training the model is significantly faster, thus finding optimal
parameters is much easier. In terms of completeness, which measures the amount
of bugs contained in the Java Classes predicted to be defective, PLS-DA
outperforms every other algorithm: it found 69.3% and 79.4% of the total bugs
with no re-sampling and up-sampling, respectively.
