Title: Image Quality Assessment for Perceptual Image Restoration: A New Dataset, Benchmark and Metric
Authors: Jinjin Gu, Haoming Cai, Haoyu Chen, Xiaoxing Ye, Jimmy Ren et al.
ID: 2011.15002
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.15002

Abstract:
Image quality assessment (IQA) is the key factor for the fast development of
image restoration (IR) algorithms. The most recent perceptual IR algorithms
based on generative adversarial networks (GANs) have brought in significant
improvement on visual performance, but also pose great challenges for
quantitative evaluation. Notably, we observe an increasing inconsistency between
perceptual quality and the evaluation results. We present two questions: Can
existing IQA methods objectively evaluate recent IR algorithms? With the focus
on beating current benchmarks, are we getting better IR algorithms? To answer
the questions and promote the development of IQA methods, we contribute a
large-scale IQA dataset, called Perceptual Image Processing ALgorithms (PIPAL)
dataset. Especially, this dataset includes the results of GAN-based IR
algorithms, which are missing in previous datasets. We collect more than 1.13
million human judgments to assign subjective scores for PIPAL images using the
more reliable Elo system. Based on PIPAL, we present new benchmarks for both IQA
and SR methods. Our results indicate that existing IQA methods cannot fairly
evaluate GAN-based IR algorithms. While using appropriate evaluation methods is
important, IQA methods should also be updated along with the development of IR
algorithms. At last, we shed light on how to improve the IQA performance on
GAN-based distortion. Inspired by the find that the existing IQA methods have an
unsatisfactory performance on the GAN-based distortion partially because of
their low tolerance to spatial misalignment, we propose to improve the
performance of an IQA network on GAN-based distortion by explicitly considering
this misalignment. We propose the Space Warping Difference Network, which
includes the novel l_2 pooling layers and Space Warping Difference layers.
Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.
