Title: ALL OUT OF PROPORTION? Stature and Body Proportions in Roman and Early Medieval England
Authors: Lauren Walther
ID: openalex.W2768357932
URL: 

The transitional period between the Roman occupation of Britain and the creation
of smaller kingdoms during the Early Medieval period is one that is heavily
debated. The shift in material culture from the fifth century onwards suggests
Continental influences, but the extent to which this represents large-scale
migrations or acculturation by indigenous people is contested. New
bioarchaeological and isotopic studies of skeletal remains demonstrate an
improvement in health from the Roman to Early Medieval periods, along with
greater evidence of a much more complicated picture with respect to the direct
association of particular grave goods with migrants. This comprehensive analysis
of stature, body proportions, and health stress from the Romano-British to Early
Medieval period represents an additional bioarchaeological contribution to these
debates. &#13;\n A total of 1248 individuals excavated from 20 cemetery sites of
Romano-British and Early Medieval date throughout southern and eastern England
were analysed. Stature was examined as an indicator of health and growth as it
is associated with childhood adversity, whilst body proportions can reflect
adaptations to local environments. The stature and body proportions of
individuals from all sites were determined through the reconstruction of living
stature using Raxter et al.’s (2006, 2007) revised Fully anatomical method and
through the analysis of a variety of indices. New mathematical regression
formulae were created for each sample based on the reconstructed living stature.
Comparisons of the anatomical and mathematical methods of stature calculation
discovered a general overestimation of stature when the Trotter and Gleser,
1952, 1958 and Trotter, 1970 methods were used.&#13;\n The use of different
indices aided in the assessment of examining differential body proportions
within and between periods. In combination with the skeletal indicators of
stress recorded, shorter tibial lengths, lower crural and higher intermembral
indices, and shortened relative lower limb lengths demonstrated the negative
impact that Roman occupation had on the residents of Britain. An improvement in
overall health was noted within the Early Medieval sample with a decreased
prevalence of these stress indicators, as well as increases in indices and
stature. This thesis demonstrates the usefulness of utilizing the anatomical
method when estimating stature of past populations in conjunction with the
analysis of body proportions and stress indicators.&#13;\n
