Title: Theorizing Pō: Embodied Cosmogony and Polynesian National Narratives
Authors: Joyce Lindsay Pualani Warren
ID: openalex.W2979327603
URL: https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7mr0d19j

Polynesian epistemology and cosmogony dictate that all life and existence come
from Pō, the generative, liminal darkness. Pō can be temporally expansive,
producing a view of time that is spiral rather than linear. Within Pō, time and
space are not necessarily discrete categories.In this dissertation, I argue that
literary depictions of Pō can represent and articulate notions of political and
cultural sovereignty throughout contemporary Polynesia. These forms of
sovereignty are rooted in cosmogonic connections to darkness and land, which are
manifested in the Indigenous body’s mediation of the intertwined spiral of time
and space. I contend that the boundless potential of Pō is reflected in the
varied ways embodied cosmogony appears in contemporary Pacific literature, and
the methods by which Native Pacific authors such as Albert Wendt, Patricia
Grace, and Victoria Nalani Kneubuhl rework Anglophone literary traditions of the
novel and the short story to advance Indigenous notions of the nation. These
authors invoke Pō through parallel yet distinct uses of “form”: first, in the
exploration of how variously raced and gendered forms of the Indigenous body can
affirm or contest the body politic; second, in the diverse articulations of
space and time through the texts’ formal construction and narratology. In these
texts, Indigenous storytelling techniques—such as kākau (tattoo), fāgogo,
whaikōrero, and oli—suggest how literary forms and representations of Pō can
variously (re)turn to the post/settler/colonial nation and (re)tell Indigenous
narratives. My analysis relies on orature but also centers the ways the
Indigenous body has always functioned as a legible text and a tool for mediating
epistemology. My theorization of Pō draws on bodily- and sensory-based
Indigenous concepts and discourses, including makawalu, Mana Wahine, and vā.
Overall, I investigate the literary intersections of cosmogony, body, and
nation, to reveal how the Indigenous body’s cosmogonic connections can overcome
the traumatic construction of the post/settler/colonial nation as the primary
marker of community. In its place, I offer a theory of embodied cosmogony that
requires an Indigenous reading praxis, resulting in a new iteration of the
Polynesian body as text and a necessary intervention in postcolonialism and
broader literary criticisms.
