Title: The Exploration of Young Audiences and Identity Development Through Social Media Platforms
Authors: Sara Benn
ID: openalex.W2747491284
URL: https://doi.org/10.23860/thesis-benn-sara-2017

Past research found that messages in popular television promote fame as a top
value, while social media allows anyone to reach broad audience. Adolescents
ages 11-17 are more likely to value fame, wealth, and image over community,
affiliation, and self-acceptance. Teens may become addicted to the peer
connection and affirmation they are able to get via social media. As a result,
young audiences may be highly influenced at this stage of development and their
value system may be influenced negatively by their use of social media? Despite
this research, some researchers see adolescent social media use well within
normal socialization, as “kids will be kids” noting that many elements of the
American teen culture remain unchanged in the digital age. This research
explores these expectations through in-depth interviews of teens and an
exhaustive literature review of scholarly articles on this topic. I used a
survey questionnaire from “My Pop Studio,” an interactive educational media
literacy resource developed by the Media Education Lab. A convenience sample of
teenagers (between the ages of 11-17) took the “celebrity quiz” from the My Pop
Studio website using a think out loud protocol where I observed them taking the
quiz and had them explain to me their choices for their response. Findings
reveal how teens value television, music, magazines, and online media and were
the way they connect to these media forms. This research found that teenagers
valued being “liked” and in some instances, being famous. Moreover, they
demonstrated values such as confidence and community, revealing that teens’
identity and social development may be affected by participation in a media
saturated culture. Through this lens, I explore current emerging themes in the
current value system of teens. Because ego is a representation of self, it is
important for this study to investigate the development of egos in young
audiences who use social media. Based on the findings, it is evident that the
rise of social media is connected to the development of self-esteem in teens.
The implications of social media use, in particular, YouTube, can build
character and confidence through self-identity and creativity. It can also help
promote social identity in groups.
