Title: What Does the Baby Selfie Say? Seeing Ways of ‘Self-Seeing’ in Infant Digital Cultures
Authors: Bryoni Trezise
ID: openalex.W2746090287
URL: https://doi.org/10.5204/mcj.1263

IntroductionWhen a baby girl born in Britain was endowed with the topical name
‘Hashtag’, a social media post decried the naming, and a media storm followed.
Before she was even home from hospital, headlines were at the ready: “Did a
mother really just name her child Hashtag?” (Nye) and “Baby Hashtag: has the
search for original names gone too far?” (Barkham). Trollers were also poised to
react, offering: “The first name is REALLY dumb. And you're even dumber,”
prompting a rejection of the baby’s name as well as her ostensibly ill-equipped
parents (Facebook). Dubbed a “Public Figure” on her Facebook page, Hashtag
Jameson accrued a particularly premature type of celebrity, where, with a
handful of baby selfies, she declared via Twitter, and only hours after birth,
that she was “already trending”.In this article, I consider the relationship
between the infant child and the visual-digital economies in which it – as in
the Hashtag hoax, above – performs. The infant child is brought into view with
the very first sentence that frames John Berger’s Ways of Seeing. “Seeing comes
before words”, he writes. “The child looks and recognizes before it can speak”
(1). Berger’s reference to the seeing child positions it as an active agent in
cultures and practices of visuality, but also uses an idea of the child to
position vision as the primary communicative means by which we “establish our
place in the surrounding world” and in which we are enveloped “before” speech
(7). Here, I explore the intensified relationship between the visual culture of
infancy and the economised digital movement of vision that it produces in one
highly specific image-genre: the baby selfie. In doing so I aim to characterise
the depictive nature of this format in terms of how it compositionally documents
– to further borrow the language of Berger, who was then discussing oil
paintings – “a way of seeing the world, which was ultimately determined by new
attitudes to property and exchange” (87).The new sociology of childhood has been
concerned with the construction of the child figure as it has interfaced with
new cultural and political realities since the early 1980s (Prout). These
include “phenomena such as the flexibilization of production … expanding
networks of knowledge … and shifts in labour market participation, work and the
global economy” (Prout 5). I suggest here that the baby selfie can be seen as an
unprecedented social marker of these transformations, signalling a heightened
degree of priceless sentiment within which the child – as an animator of amateur
affects, viral tendencies and algorithmic logics – is given to operate. I focus
on the compositional propensities of the baby selfie in order to characterise
how it visually construes a particular kind of self that is intrinsically
entangled with the conception of the image as a form of capital exchange. That
is, I suggest that in its intense and yet paradoxical self-performativity the
baby selfie depicts a way of seeing that is predicated on, but also troubles,
the conceit of a commodified social relation. What Does the Baby Selfie
Say?“Should babies really be taking selfies?” yells a headline warning against
the perceived dangers of youth digital cultures (Cox). The 2014 story references
a phone app built by father Matthew Pegula that uses front-facing cameras to
“unintentionally teac[h] your baby to take selfies of themselves” by generating
“rattling sounds, pictures of cute animals, and more to get the baby’s
attention.” The article explains that “[w]hen the baby reaches out to touch the
screen, the camera snaps their selfie and saves it to the device”. While
Pegula’s Baby Selfie App is available for purchase on Google Play’s app store
for $1.09, a similar device named New Born Fame, featuring “Facebook and Twitter
symbols that are activated when the youngster reaches for them” and inclusions
such as “a pair of shoes with an internal pedometer that tracks kicks and posts
the activity online, a squeezable GPS tracker and a ‘selfie-ball’ that
photographs the baby and uploads the shot whenever the ball rotates” (Peppers),
artistically interrogated this relatively new category of “insta-infa-fame”.In
their article “What Does the Selfie Say?”, Theresa M. Senft and Nancy K. Baym
argue that the selfie exists as the hallmark genre of a new kind of self-
reflexive image-making, one that is formally characterised by the “self-
generated” nature of the photographic portraiture it depicts, which is in turn
conceived for its transmissibility, occurring “primarily via social media”
(1589). Popularised in part by new technologies (the camera phone, the smart
phone, and then the front-facing phone camera) and in part by new digital
platforms (“Facebook, Instagram, SnapChat, Tumblr, WeChat, and Tinder”) (1589),
Senft and Baym further explain that the selfie is simultaneously a photographic
object which transmits human feeling, a practice of sending (as well as of
depicting), and third, a monetized assemblage curated by nonhuman agents. It is
this last factor which renders the objecthood of the selfie as it relates to the
vernacular that it enacts as well as the practice of its making,
political.Notions around the simultaneously constituting and yet virally
distributed “self” of social media are not new. A now prominent literature
around how the selfie graphically manifests and performs: intimate publics
(Walsh and Baker), a normative or resistive image repertoire (Murray), and
emotionalised, communicable affect (Bayer et al.), gives rise to a range of
viewpoints that aim to characterise how the hyper self-reflexivity of the selfie
depicts – visually as well as ontologically – the self as an agent of their own
transmissibility (Holiday et al.). From these we understand that the selfie is
distinct for its (i) self-representational image-format (it is an image made by
the self, of the self, and thereby is identifiable for its capturing of the self
in this very process of self-composition); ii) its methods of distribution
(selfies are taken and distributed often instantaneously, and thereby are not
only objects of, but active agents of, the reshaping of digitally communicative
economies); iii) its idiomatic performance of a sociality and aesthetic of the
amateur or vernacular (Abidin).The doubled glance both inwards and outwards that
the selfie casts is further characterised for how it traces as well as points to
a gestural self-awareness held within its compositional characteristics (Frosh).
This moves us from a semiotic reading of the selfie to a reading of its
“kineasthetic sociability” – that is, its embodied inception of new forms of
autobiographical inscription which say “not only ‘see this, here, now,’ but also
‘see me showing you me’” (Frosh 1609-10). Here, the selfie is less a static
object and more a gestural imprint of the communicative action in process: it is
“simultaneously mediating (the outstretched arm executes the taking of the
selfie) and mediated (the outstretched arm becomes a legible and iterable sign
within selfies of, among other things, the selfieness of the image)” (Frosh
1611). In this sense, its compositional logic offers a tracing of this very
enactive, embodied tendency, which bears more than an indexical relationship to
the field that it marks – it depicts itself as a constituting part of that
field.While these characteristics are broadly accepted as being true of selfies,
the “selfieness” of a baby selfie might be seen to offer a paradoxical reframing
of these depictive qualities. That is, if a selfie is a self-depiction of a
process of self-depiction, the baby selfie most usually performs this self-
reflexivity with recourse to an external agent who is either present in the
image frame or who is occluded from it but nonetheless implied by the very
nature of the image (a parent or the image-facilitator, or indeed, a baby app).
The baby selfie’s scene of self-depiction, then, might be thought of as a kind
of self-depiction-by-proxy. At the same time, the baby selfie asks us to invest
in the belief that the picture was knowingly self-taken, and in doing so, models
a kind of aspirational autonomy for the child/baby figure who is depicted. In
this sense, the baby selfie, by its very nature, disrupts the accepted
distinguishing format of the selfie: that the picture is both self-depicting and
is self-composed. Instead, the baby selfie can be seen to gesturally
reincorporate into its visual scene the very question of this structural
im/possibility.Depicting the Viral ChildThe figure of the child has been
considered by a range of theorists as the organising principle of modernity.
Philippe Aries’ foundational work has argued that the modern discovery of
childhood is reflected in the rise of the nuclear family and consequential
shifts from sociability to privacy. Viviana Zelizer similarly positions the
emergence of the economically “useless” but sentimentally “priceless” child
against comprehensive social and industrial transformations taking place across
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries that excluded the child as a labourer
and instead situated it with the disciplinary regime of education. The hetero-
normatively white child has since been shown to emblematise concepts of social
futurity (Edelman) and myths of morality, humanity and the “ordering of time”
(Pelligrini 98).Following Zelizer, the more recently ‘digitally’ visual cultures
of childhood can be seen to spin the figure of the child around new socio-
economic and discursive imperatives. Lisa Cartwright writes about photographs of
waiting adoptee children, in which “children of poor countries become
commodities and their images become advertisements in a global market” (83).
Deborah Lupton similarly considers the coding of infant bodies in popular media
for their “represent[ation] as helpless, vulnerable, uncontrolled, dirty and
leaky in opposition to the idealised adult body that is powerful, self-
regulated, au
