Title: Critical Ethnomusicology Pedagogy with Migrant Youth in Edmonton, Canada: Promoting Cultural Empowerment and Intercultural Learning through Music
Authors: Rana El Kadi
ID: openalex.W2801158541
URL: https://doi.org/10.7939/r39k4667k

Given the globally accelerating patterns of voluntary and forced migration,
Canadian schools are currently serving the most culturally, religiously, and
linguistically diverse student cohort in the country’s history. Many Canadian
schools have responded by instituting culturally responsive curricula and
diverse programming models; however, there is still a considerable gap in the
provision of programs that effectively facilitate migrant students’ adaptation
and success in their new social and educational environment. Despite some recent
attempts at making Alberta’s provincially mandated curriculum more inclusive of
Aboriginal and French Canadian perspectives, it continues to be dominated by
Anglo-Saxon ideals. Furthermore, many scholars argue that Canadian education is
heavily influenced by official multicultural policy, which downplays difference
and treats ethnic and cultural groups as monolithic, static entities, thus
reinforcing cultural stereotypes and reproducing social inequities within
schools. This combination communicates a tacit yet palpable cultural hierarchy,
which can disempower students of non-dominant cultures and alienate them from
learning and social contexts. Given music’s established importance as a vehicle
for children and young people’s construction and negotiation of individual,
cultural, and group identities, I was interested in investigating the following
questions: What are some alternative ways of applying critical pedagogy theory
within ethnomusicology, such that it specifically validates the non-dominant
musico-cultural knowledges of migrant youth? What are some of the methodological
challenges that one might face when practicing critical ethnomusicology pedagogy
with junior high migrant students in Canada? And how might these challenges be
addressed? By utilizing a critical pedagogy framework, I sought to explore how
migrant youth might utilize participatory music making and ethnomusicological
tools to: a) counter the “subtractive,” arguably colonizing effects of Canadian
mainstream schooling; b) promote a more critical understanding and practice of
multiculturalism within their schools; and c) formulate more positive social
interactions and friendships with students of other linguistic, cultural, and
religious backgrounds. This led me to conduct three cycles of praxis with a
total of 50 junior high migrant students, their parents, and teachers at a
faith-based school and at a public school in Edmonton, Alberta. My dissertation
ethnographically documents and comparatively analyzes these cycles, which took
place between 2012 and 2014. Specifically, it recounts young students’
experiences of migration and schooling through the lens of music. It first
reveals their challenges and their social agency as they negotiate different
facets of their fluid identities, express and pursue their interests, and
navigate a variety of relationships within the constraints of two contrastive
school contexts. Second, my dissertation comparatively discusses the
methodological challenges and resultant design features used in three cycles of
ethnomusicological praxis, while citing the different factors at play: school
philosophy and culture, school resources and staff support, participating class
size, school cultural politics, inter-student social dynamics, and individual
student characteristics. My praxis further involved experimenting with various
music-based research methodologies that are youth-centered, collaborative, and
engaging for migrant youth of diverse backgrounds. Within my dissertation, I
critically assess these approaches’ apparent strengths and weaknesses through a
comparison of the methodological challenges and project outcomes within each
cycle of praxis. Finally, I utilize the insights acquired from these three
cycles of praxis in order to propose and evaluate the impacts and limitations of
a new pedagogical approach called Critical Ethnomusicology Pedagogy (CEP). I
argue that, unlike critical pedagogy’s usual focus on verbal dialogue as an
avenue towards critical thinking and conscientization, this approach’s focus on
music and dance performance is capable of transcending barriers that may render
traditional critical pedagogy ineffective within multicultural migrant
classrooms.
