Title: About the Artist: Lisa Reihana
Authors: Moana Nepia
ID: openalex.W2580179492
URL: https://doi.org/10.1353/cp.2017.0000

About the Artist:Lisa Reihana Moana Nepia Through a pioneering practice
combining photography, video, and installation, Lisa Reihana has achieved what
most artists only ever dream about: she makes a full-time living from her art.
Of Māori Ngāpuhi, Ngāti Tū, and Ngāti Hine descent, she has had her work
exhibited in museums, art galleries, and art festivals around the world,
including the Auckland Art Gallery, Brooklyn Museum, University of Cambridge
Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, Asia Pacific Triennial of Contemporary
Art in Queensland, October Gallery in London, Jean-Marie Tjibaou Cultural Center
in New Caledonia, and Te Papa Tongarewa in Wellington. Click for larger view
View full resolution Photo by Moana Nepia In 2017, Reihana represents
Aotearoa/New Zealand at the Venice Biennale with Emissaries, which includes in
Pursuit of Venus [infected], a 32-minute and 23-meter-long video projection
inspired by Josef Dufour’s 1804 French scenic wallpaper Les Sauvages De La Mer
Pacifique (http://www.inpursuitofvenus.com) Utilizing green-screen technology to
superimpose performers against a back-drop based on Dufour’s whimsical Tahitian
landscape, Reihana’s vignettes explore meetings between Polynesian ancestors and
early European explorers. Historic characters such as Captain James Cook present
glimpses into some of the darker “infected” moments of those encounters and also
into the scientific motives for European expeditions alluded to in the title.
Monumental in scale, this work follows similarly striking presentations in
Venice by other Māori artists such as Michael Parekowhai, Rachael Rakena, and
Brett Graham. Stills from in Pursuit of Venus [infected] appear in this issue
along with images from Reihana’s earlier video and photographic work. Her
philosophy is “making” rather than “taking,” with a long-standing emphasis on
portraiture photographs and historical and ancestral narratives. The
collaborative nature of Reihana’s practice is made possible with the help of her
family, numerous friends, and fellow artists. [End Page VII] Click for larger
view View full resolution in Pursuit of Venus [infected] (detail 1), by Lisa
Reihana, 2015. hd video, color, sound, 32 min. Vignettes in iPOVi, including the
tattooing of a European sailor, reconstruct actual and imaginary encounters
between indigenous Pacific Islanders and early European explorers. As Anne
Salmond has suggested, such meetings were “sometimes explosive and destructive
(‘infected’), sometimes genial and creative . . . world-shifting encounters”
(quoted in the exhibition catalog Lisa Reihana: In Pursuit of Venus, edited by
Rhana Devenport and Clare McIntosh [2015, 3]). [End Page VIII] Click for larger
view View full resolution Diva, by Lisa Reihana, 2007. Photographic print on
aluminum, 2000 x 1200 mm, from Digital Marae. Diva features among a collection
of photographic representations of atua (ancestral deities) and contemporary
icons in Reihana’s ongoing Digital Marae installation, which transforms gallery
spaces to resemble wharenui (meeting houses) using digital imagery in place of
wooden carvings and woven panels. [End Page IX] Click for larger view View full
resolution Dandy, by Lisa Reihana, 2007. Photographic print on aluminum, 2000 x
1200 mm, from Digital Marae. Countering stereotypical depictions of Māori
masculinity, strength, and prowess that focus on physical accomplishments on the
battlefield or rugby playgrounds, Reihana’s Dandy, with full-face moko (tattoo)
and Victorian attire, asserts a quietly confident sense of elegance and poise.
[End Page X] Click for larger view View full resolution Hinepukohurangi, by Lisa
Reihana, 2001. Photographic print on aluminum, 2000 x 1000 mm, from Digital
Marae. Described as “Children of the Mist,” Ngāi Tūhoe people from Aotearoa
trace their ancestry from Hinepukohurangi, the mist that surrounds their
mountains and cloaks their valleys. [End Page XI] Click for larger view View
full resolution Maui, by Lisa Reihana, 2007. Photographic print on aluminum,
2000 x 1200 mm. From Digital Marae. The ancestral demigod Maui features in
creation stories across the Pacific as a creative innovator, trickster, and
instigator of change. Having hauled new lands up from the ocean floor, slowed
down the sun, and sourced the secret of fire, he is depicted in Digital Marae as
surfing a wave toward us. Maui role model for the power of transformative
thinking. [End Page XII] Click for larger view View full resolution Mahuika, by
Lisa Reihana, 2001. Photographic print on aluminum...
