Title: Beyond Green Consumerism: Uncovering the Motivations of Green Citizenship
Authors: Spencer Harbo, Raymond De Young, Meaghan L. Guckian
ID: openalex.W2737341852
URL: https://doi.org/10.3998/mjs.12333712.0005.105

Individual behavior change is a necessary condition for making a positive
societal transition to a resource-constrained future. Because we live on a
planet with finite resources, behavior change interventions need to move beyond
creating "green consumers" and instead foster and support "green citizens."
Green consumerism has proven largely ineffective in curbing collective rates of
consumption; despite improved efficiencies and green-and-lean social norms and
policies, society's aggregate resource and energy usage continues to climb.
There is an urgent need to promote agency and self-sufficiency with regard to
individual conservation behaviors, while simultaneously promoting mindfulness of
collective impacts on the planet. Based on an analysis of results from a
community-based survey (N=223) conducted in Southeastern Michigan, this article
develops a profile of a green citizen and documents how it differs from that of
a green consumer. Characteristics of green citizenship go beyond pro-
environmental knowledge and attitudes and thoughtful consumer behavior. Green
citizens hold a distinct psychological motivation from the frugal use of
resources and demonstrate a connection to nature, compared to green consumers,
who are motivated by helping others and identify with pro-environmental
attitudes. The emerging profile of green citizens and their associated behaviors
suggest a need for policy and community action initiatives that dramatically
differ from those currently aimed at promoting green consumerism. A reframing of
environmental programs, away from consumerism and toward citizenship, may prove
challenging. Deeply embedded in most current environmental efforts is a view of
people as consumers who can be manipulated to make the correct decisions. The
data reported here uncover mindful actors with power and agency. The article
concludes by offering recommendations for policymakers, educators, and
organizers to foster durable change in our communities. Beyond Green
Consumerism: Uncovering the Motivations of Green Citizenship Vol. 5 * Stem
question was "Please rate how much satisfaction you get from the following
items." The 5-point Likert scale ranged from 1 = none to 5 = a very great deal.
** All pairwise comparisons of means are significantly different at p 0.001.
