Title: Meals and Eating Practices within a Multi-generational Approach-A Qualitative Insight Study
Authors: Christine Brombach
ID: openalex.W2788056883
URL: https://doi.org/10.15344/2456-8171/2017/122

Background: Eating behaviour is predominantly learned in childhood during
socialisation, growing up in a cultural context. Various studies suggest that
parents play an important role in the patterning of the eating behaviour of
children. Very few studies consider the development of meals and eating
practices in the context of multi-generational influences, therefore, the aim of
this research project was to investigate influences on eating behaviour in one
multi-generational family, presently living in South-West Germany. The parents,
first generation (F1), were born at the end of 19th century. The couple had 15
children, the second generation (F2), and two of those children are alive today.
There are 31 grandchildren (F3) and 50 great grand children (F4) and currently
more than 10 great grand children (F5). The purpose of this study was to gain
insights into the onset of eating behaviour and eating practices within a single
multigenerational family perspective. Methods: This study is a single case study
of a multi-generational family living in South-West Germany. Qualitative
interviews with an aide-mémoire were used within the matrilineal branch of the
family, tracing four generations and spanning a time frame of three centuries.
Results: The predominant role of women in meal preparation, use of family
recipes, customs and food practices can be traced into the F4 generation. It
appears that the matrilineal dissemination of meal structures and opinions,
family recipes, use of cherished cookbooks, customs, is stronger than in the
patrilineal mode and can be traced to the F4 in the present. Conclusion: To date
very few studies have been conducted with a three generational, let alone
multigenerational, approach on tracing eating practices within one family. The
findings permit a better understanding of the onset of eating practices in a
broader familial and cultural historical context.
