Title: Holy Hip Hop in the City of Angels
Authors: Christina Zanfagna
ID: openalex.W4211017239
URL: https://doi.org/10.1525/luminos.35

<i>Open access to this title is possible thanks to the generous support of
Arcadia, a charitable fund of Lisbet Rausing and Peter Baldwin.</i> In the
1990s, Los Angeles was home to numerous radical social and environmental
eruptions. In the face of several major earthquakes and floods, riots and
economic insecurity, police brutality and mass incarceration, some young black
Angelenos turned to holy hip hop—a movement merging Christianity and hip hop
culture—to “save” themselves and the city. Converting street corners to open-air
churches and gangsta rap beats into anthems of praise, holy hip hoppers used
gospel rap to navigate complicated social and spiritual realities and to
transform the Southland’s fractured terrains into musical Zions. Armed with
beats, rhymes, and bibles, they journeyed through black Lutheran congregations,
prison ministries, African churches, reggae dancehalls, hip hop clubs, Nation of
Islam meetings, and Black Lives Matter marches. Zanfagna’s fascinating
ethnography provides a contemporary and unique view of black LA, offering a
much-needed perspective on how music and religion intertwine in people’s
everyday experiences. “An extraordinary book: a treasure trove of information
and a tour de force of original research about an intertextual nexus of music,
religion, and social practice.” GEORGE LIPSITZ, author of <i>How Racism Takes
Place</i> “Zanfagna’s intimate and nuanced work outlines what she calls
‘geographies of conversion.’ She reveals people moving toward ‘Zyon’, where they
might encounter trouble, contradiction, and conflict, but also ecstasy, flight,
and freedom. An often surprising, subtly transformative book.” JEFF CHANG,
author of <i>Can’t Stop Won’t Stop: A History of the Hip-Hop Generation</i>
“Zanfagna graces readers with a deeply engaged and intimately observed unveiling
of a Jesus-worshipping West Coast hip hop scene. Through determined, industrious
research and wise reflection she provides an exposed view of a pop-savvy form of
missionary work that combines social justice motivations with a beat-driven
imperative to ‘flipping the script(ures).’” GREGORY TATE, musician, and
producer, and author of <i>Midnight Lightning: Jimi Hendrix and the Black
Experience</i>
