Title: Perceptions of Corporal Punishment among Creole and Maroon Professionals and Community Members in Suriname
Authors: Inger W. van der Kooij, Josta Nieuwendam, Gerben Moerman, Frits Boer, Ramón Lindauer
ID: openalex.W2740066855
URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/car.2475

Child discipline is a vital part of child‐rearing in all cultures. The need for
child discipline is generally recognised, but considerable debate exists
regarding the best methods. Corporal punishment (CP) is a dominant practice in
Caribbean cultures. This qualitative study investigated community perceptions of
the function, legality and boundaries of CP in child‐rearing practices in
Suriname, in which CP is defined as hitting a child on their buttocks or
extremities using an open hand . Twelve focus group discussions were conducted
with adolescent and adult community members from Creole and Maroon backgrounds,
as well as with professionals working with children. ATLAS.ti (version 7.5.4), a
qualitative data package, was used to conduct the analyses. This study showed
how violent forms of disciplining children are widely accepted and practised in
Suriname. CP is considered a necessary and respected form of disciplining
children, particularly by parents. Participants know about the existence of the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child that has been ratified in
Suriname, but there is a lack of knowledge about its content. Developing
appropriate policy responses to violence towards children requires understanding
of the perception and use of CP. Such knowledge is needed to tackle the
invisibility and social acceptance of violence in child discipline. Key
Practitioner Messages Under certain circumstances, Corporal Punishment (CP) is
accepted and applied in Suriname, despite growing knowledge of its harmful
consequences. While participants considered the lawfulness of behaviour, they
were primarily interested in the intentions of the caretakers when using CP If
these were interpreted ‘in the best interest of the child’, CP was not
considered maltreatment. Understanding of what motivates caregivers to use CP
helps in developing appropriate policy responses in order to prevent and respond
to violence towards children.
