Title: Vietnamese early childhood teacher education and new early childhood education practice: a cultural-historical analysis
Authors: Phan Thi
ID: openalex.W3150302976
URL: 

The last decade has been marked by radical curriculum and pedagogical reforms in
Vietnamese early childhood education (ECE). In essence, the reforms are paradigm
shifts from teacher-centred to child-centred pedagogy, and from fragmented
subject-based to a holistic integrated curriculum. Studies (Phan, 2005; Le,
2009, Nguyen, 2009) suggest that ECE teachers are struggling to enact the
shifts. One of the reasons is speculated as the mismatch between what early
childhood teacher education (ECTE) can offer and what new ECE practice needs.
Thus, this study explores how Vietnamese ECTE perceives its professional
situation - the challenges and opportunities the profession may face in response
to the demands of changing ECE practice. This study employs dialectics and
cultural-historical theory (Marx &amp; Engels, 1998; Ratner, 2006, Ellis,
Edwards, &amp; Smagorinsky, 2010) as the theoretical tools to explain the
current professional situation of Vietnamese ECTE, and the way participants of
this study perceive it. In this case study, Vietnamese ECTE’s perspectives on
its professional situation are gained from semi-structured, in-depth interviews
with three Deans and nine lecturers at three ECTE faculties. Their perspectives
are incorporated with the viewpoints of other ECTE stakeholders, including an
ECE policy maker, two employers (kindergarten principals) and four ECE teachers
(ECTE graduates). This study indicates that Vietnamese ECTE is now in a crisis,
characterized by three threads of enormous challenges, relating key professional
aspects. The first thread of challenges is ECTE’s difficulties in professional
conceptualization - in understanding the new ECE philosophies promoted by the
ECE reforms, and subsequently, re-conceptualizing its professional beliefs and
practice in response to changing ECE practice. The second thread of challenges
is that ECTE’s legacy (in terms of curriculum, pedagogy, and management),
established within Vietnamese Confucian traditions and Soviet ethos and
relatively unchanged up to now, strongly contradicts with the rapidly changing
demands of ECE practice. The third thread of challenges is born out of intensive
interaction between conservative ECTE and the fast changing Vietnamese
contemporary socio-economic context. Vietnam’s shift to a market economy and
responding higher education policies to the changing context have intensified
ECTE’s persistent problems and brought in new conflicts. Together, the three
threads of challenges indicate tense contradictions between the need to meet the
increased demands of changing ECE practice and ECTE’s current capability;
between ECTE’s responsibilities and conditions offered to the profession.
Nevertheless, this study suggests that the crisis, recognized by the majority of
participants, provides enormous opportunities for ECTE to move forward if the
profession manages to resolve the contradictions. Resolving the contradictions
is expected to be very challenging. Dealing with the new ECE practice means
Vietnamese ECTE must, firstly, reconcile the sharp conflict between new ECE
philosophies and the cultural-historical legacy deeply embedded in ECTE’s
thinking and practice. Secondly, ECTE needs more efficient higher education
policies to address its persistent professional problems and resolve competing
influences from the fast changing societal context.
