Title: Narratives of Samoan women who established A'oga Amata in Christchurch New Zealand
Authors: Joeana Togiaso
ID: openalex.W2606960973
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10092/13358

This qualitative study explored the lived experiences of seven Samoan women who
became involved in establishing A’oga Amata (licensed Samoan early childhood
centres) in Christchurch, New Zealand. A foundation of Pasifika epistemologies
comprising talanoa, teu le vā and Fa’aSamoa was used to validate Pasifika ways
of knowing as essential forms of knowledge to be used in research for, and by,
Pasifika peoples. Western theories of Womanism and critical race theory were
also used to support this Pasifika foundation. Every researcher’s life shapes
both the question and approach to research. Therefore, the thesis begins with
self-narratives from the researcher, supporting the methodology of
autoethnography to add depth and richness to the data. The findings revealed
that women’s actions were influenced by their values of Fa’aSamoa, cultural
beliefs and social motivators of hope and fear within the New Zealand context.
Samoan women were poutu (the main pole) that upheld family, church and work
within A’oga Amata (licensed Samoan early childhood centres). As immigrants from
Samoa, women overcame challenges as a minority culture; and created new spaces
for Samoan families. With the support of the church, A’oga Amata became a place
of cultural transmission, a place of belonging and also a place where women
experienced new confidence, leadership roles and higher status within their own
homes, churches and community. Unfortunately, colonial incursions of licensing
regulations, teacher qualifications and western ideals of quality teaching
undermined the work that was created by these pioneering women. These findings
reveal serious implications for A’oga Amata where language, culture and the
identity of Samoan children in New Zealand is threatened and lost if cultural
incursions continue to exist. The narratives of Samoan women who established
A’oga Amata in Christchurch are an inspiration to the whole Samoan community and
early childhood community.
