Title: Child–Computer Interaction at the Beginner Stage of Music Learning: Effects of Reflexive Interaction on Children’s Musical Improvisation
Authors: Anna Rita Addessi, Filomena Anelli, Diber Benghi, Anders Friberg
ID: openalex.W2581651492
URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00065

In this article children's musical improvisation is investigated through the
"reflexive interaction" paradigm. We used a particular system, the MIROR-Impro,
implemented in the framework of the MIROR project (EC-FP7), which is able to
reply to the child playing a keyboard by a "reflexive" output, mirroring (with
repetitions and variations) her/his inputs. The study was conducted in a public
primary school, with 47 children, aged 6-7. The experimental design used the
convergence procedure, based on three sample groups allowing us to verify if the
reflexive interaction using the MIROR-Impro is <i>necessary</i> and/or
<i>sufficient</i> to improve the children's abilities to improvise. The
following conditions were used as independent variables: to play only the
keyboard, the keyboard with the MIROR-Impro but with not-reflexive reply, the
keyboard with the MIROR-Impro with reflexive reply. As dependent variables we
estimated the children's ability to improvise in solos, and in duets. Each child
carried out a training program consisting of 5 weekly individual 12 min
sessions. The control group played the complete package of independent
variables; Experimental Group 1 played the keyboard and the keyboard with the
MIROR-Impro with not-reflexive reply; Experimental Group 2 played only the
keyboard with the reflexive system. One week after, the children were asked to
improvise a musical piece on the keyboard alone (Solo task), and in pairs with a
friend (Duet task). Three independent judges assessed the Solo and the Duet
tasks by means of a grid based on the TAI-Test for Ability to Improvise rating
scale. The EG2, which trained only with the reflexive system, reached the
highest average results and the difference with EG1, which did not used the
reflexive system, is statistically significant when the children improvise in a
duet. The results indicate that in the sample of participants the reflexive
interaction alone could be sufficient to increase the improvisational skills,
and necessary when they improvise in duets. However, these results are in
general not statistically significant. The correlation between Reflexive
Interaction and the ability to improvise is statistically significant. The
results are discussed on the light of the recent literature in neuroscience and
music education.
