Title: Assessing the effect of narrative transportation, portrayed action, and photographic style on the likelihood to comment on posted selfies
Authors: Stefania Farace, Tom van Laer, Ko de Ruyter, Martin Wetzels
ID: openalex.W3125268772
URL: https://doi.org/10.1108/ejm-03-2016-0158

Purpose This paper aims to assess the effect of narrative transportation,
portrayed action and photographic style on viewers’ likelihood to comment on
posted consumer photos. Design/methodology/approach Integrating visual semiotics
and experiments, this research examines the influence of consumer photos on
viewers’ likelihood to comment on the visualised narrative. One pilot, three
experimental and a content analysis involve photos varying in their narrative
perspective (selfie vs elsie) and portrayed content (no product, no action or
directed action). The authors also test for the boundary condition of the role
of the photographic style (snapshot, professional and “parody” selfie) on the
likelihood to comment on consumer photos. Findings Viewers are more likely to
comment on photos displaying action. When these photos are selfies, the effect
is exacerbated. The experience of narrative transportation – a feeling of
entering a world evoked by the narrative – underlies this effect. However, if a
snapshot style is used (primed or manipulated) – namely, the photographic style
appears genuine, unconstructed and natural – the superior effect of selfies
disappears because of greater perceived silliness of the visualised narrative.
Practical implications Managers should try to motivate consumers to take selfies
portraying action if their aim is to encourage electronic word-of-mouth. Social
implications Organisations can effectively use consumer photos portraying
consumption for educational purpose (e.g. eating healthfully and reducing
alcohol use). Originality/value This research links consumer photos and
electronic word-of-mouth and extends the marketing literature on visual
narratives, which is mainly focused on company rather than user-generated
content.
