Title: Challenges faced by female chefs in the Kenyan hospitality industry: A study through an African oral tradition of storytelling
Authors: Charles Orido
ID: openalex.W2732295560
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10292/10626

Female chefs experience many challenges in the male-dominated chef profession.
Research shows that female chefs face challenges of promotion, low pay, work-
life balance, burnout and sexual harassment (Fungai, Monica, &amp; Zengeni,
2013; Harris &amp; Giuffre, 2010; Murray‐Gibbons &amp; Gibbons, 2007). This
research aims to investigate whether the challenges that female chefs in Kenya
are similar to the experiences of female chefs elsewhere, as suggested by
studies in Zimbabwe (Fungai et al., 2013), in the UK (Murray‐Gibbons &amp;
Gibbons, 2007) and in the US (Harris &amp; Giuffre, 2010). Identifying these
challenges could help managers tackle issues effectively, thereby attracting
more female chefs to the profession and enabling their opportunities and career
prospects in the hospitality industry. \t&#13;\nThe study is grounded within an
African feminist theory that highlights issues of African women. Using a
qualitative research approach through the African oral tradition of
storytelling, 15 chefs were interviewed. The study was conducted in Nairobi,
Kenya’s capital city. &#13;\nThe findings suggest that the lack of Kenyan female
chefs may be attributed to a myriad of challenges such as patriarchal attitudes,
hospitality career stereotyping, sexual harassment, gender discrimination,
unhealthy work environment, hierarchical kitchen structure, inefficient and
traditional methods of production, work-life balance and ill health due to
overwork. The longevity of female chefs in the hospitality industry is therefore
threatened as female chefs seek opportunities elsewhere, including becoming
housewives. &#13;\nThe study further suggests that while hospitality schools
train, female chefs suffer from the Kenyan hospitality industry’s
reluctance/refusal to absorb female chefs into the job market. Contrary to this,
female chefs are viewed as creative and passionate about their work. Therefore,
an environment that does not accommodate female chefs suggests the hospitality
industry stands to miss out on the skills of female chefs. The country’s economy
also loses when qualified female chefs cannot help in building the economy.
