Title: The Visual Language of Emojis: A Study on College Students’ Social Support Communication in Online Social Networks
Authors: Ren-Whei Harn
ID: openalex.W2788657274
URL: http://dissertations.umi.com/ku:15322

The transition from high school to college can be stressful, and research
suggests that stress is often the trigger of mental health issues like
depression and anxiety among college students. Social support can be critical in
helping young adults adjust to college and buffering college students from the
negative effects of stress. In this digital media age, social support can be
attained through interactions on social network sites such as Facebook or
Instagram. A major disadvantage of computer-mediated interactions is the
difficulty of incorporating nonverbal cues such as facial and gestural
expressions. While the absence of visual cues has been a challenge for effective
online supportive communication, the recent emergence of emojis addresses this
issue. This dissertation examines how college students use emojis to communicate
social support on Instagram. Specifically, it examines how emoji use is
associated both with stress and with types of social support messages. Three
empirical studies were conducted: content analysis of Instagram posts including
the #collegeproblems hashtag, content analysis of the visual representations of
emojis, and five focus groups with undergraduate college students. Results show
that college students share thoughts about schoolwork, self-expression, and
physical and mental health on Instagram. In addition, emojis are often used to
enhance the sentiment of a message or express empathy, as well as to convey
humorous or sarcastic expressions. The ambiguity of emojis makes it particularly
suitable for emotional communication because one of the benefits of visual
language communication is its interpretive flexibility. However, the findings
also indicate that visual representation discrepancies with the current design
and development of emojis can cause miscommunication and lead to unsupportive
interactions. As one of the first studies examining the role of emojis in online
supportive communication, this dissertation offers theoretical and practical
implications regarding the use of visual graphics in social support. Concepts
and measurements used in this study inform future studies in online
communication, emojis, and visual communication. For scholars interested in
studying social support and empathy, this study provides a mixed-methods
framework for understanding these complex concepts.
