Title: "Choir is for Girls": Intersectional Mixed Methods Perspectives on Adolescent Gender Identity, Singing Interest, and Choral Music Participation
Authors: Briana Nannen
ID: openalex.W2610997700
URL: https://digitalcommons.unl.edu/musicstudent/105

As students progress through adolescent development, researchers have observed a
lack of male participation in choral music activities. This male to female
imbalance is often attributed to a perception that singing is a feminine
activity and results in a lack of balance in choral music ensembles. The purpose
of this mixed methods study was to explore adolescent gender identity as it
relates to singing interest and choral music participation. An explanatory
sequential mixed methods design was used, in which quantitative data were
collected and analyzed followed by in-depth qualitative interviews. A group of
9th grade students (n=174) completed the Children’s Sex Role Inventory and the
Singing Interest Inventory to gauge their self-perceived levels of masculinity
and femininity along with their level of singing interest. Information from the
quantitative portion of this study indicated that girls had both a higher
interest in singing and a higher rate of participation in choral music ensembles
than their male peers. A significant contribution of this study was that
although singing is often perceived as feminine, no significant differences were
found between categorized gender groups and singing interest. Qualitative
interviews were conducted with two groups of male students who were not enrolled
in choir: low singing interest scores (n=4) and high singing interest scores
(n=4). Transcribed and coded interviews resulted in the following themes: low
singing interest, Guys are physical, Girls are feminine, Shared perceptions,
Guys don’t sing, and Calling them names; high singing interest, Men want
muscles, Girls are expressive, Shared perceptions, Choir is for girls, Get made
fun of, and No labels. The shared theme Shared perceptions suggests that
participant perceptions are the same as their parents and friends. The theme No
labels was unique to the high singing interest group. Participants in that group
demonstrated a higher level of acceptance for atypical gender behavior.
