Title: From damsel in distress to active agent : female agency in children's and young adult fiction.
Authors: Megan McDonough
ID: openalex.W2743086492
URL: https://doi.org/10.18297/etd/2728

This dissertation analyzes the different ways in which female characters in
children’s and young adult fiction can claim agency. Using adaptation theory,
feminist theory, and theories of agency and autonomy, this project examines how
portrayals of female protagonists have changed to accept a multiplicity of
strong females, and why we need these different kinds of characters within our
culture. Working with the definition of agency as the choices one makes and the
subsequent actions she takes, this dissertation examines how female characters
from paradigm shifting texts claim agency. Each chapter uses a specific feminist
lens to explore literary texts and their film adaptations in order to
demonstrate shifting configurations of female agency. Adaptation is important
because it creates new meaning through the creation of an adjacent, but distinct
text of its own. Therefore female protagonists can claim agency in new and
different ways in the film depictions. Each of the four chapters is a specific
case study with close readings of specific texts in order to explore the
different ways in which women claim agency. Chapter one breaks the Disney
princesses into four groups, and uses Simone de Beauvoir’s concepts of dutiful
daughter and independent woman, in order to examine how the princess characters
have changed and gained agency over time. Sandra M. Gilbert and Susan Gubar’s
idea of the “angel” versus the “monster” is used in chapter two to examine how
fairy tale reboot films allow both the princess and the villainess to both be
more complex characters who claim agency. The women of the Harry Potter series
are the focus of chapter three, as the chapter explores the varied roles women
play and how these women create a postfeminist community. Chapter four looks at
Katniss Everdeen from the Hunger Games series, and through a lens of
ecofeminism, how she uses the land to her advantage both save her life and shame
the government. The dissertation concludes with a brief look at other texts with
more diverse characters, and how diversity needs to be another avenue of study
in relation to female agency.
