Title: Using performative knowledge production to explore marketplace exclusion
Authors: Gemma Burgess, Mihaela Kelemen, Sue Moffat, Elizabeth Parsons
ID: openalex.W2747696315
URL: https://doi.org/10.1108/qmr-09-2016-0085

Purpose This paper aims to contribute to understandings of the dynamics of
marketplace exclusion and explore the benefits of a performative approach to
knowledge production. Design/methodology/approach Interactive documentary
theatre is used to explore the pressing issue of marketplace exclusion in a
deprived UK city. The authors present a series of three vignettes taken from the
performance to explore the embodied and dialogical nature of performative
knowledge production. Findings The performative mode of knowledge production has
a series of advantages over the more traditional research approaches used in
marketing. It is arguably more authentic, embodied and collaborative. However,
this mode of research also has its challenges particularly in the interpretation
and presentation of the data. Research limitations/implications The paper
highlights the implications of performative knowledge production for critical
consumer learning. It also explores how the hitherto neglected concept of
marketplace exclusion might bring together insights into the mechanics and
outcomes of exclusion. Originality/value While theatrical and performative
metaphors have been widely used to theorise interactions in the marketplace, as
yet the possibility of using theatre as a form of inquiry within marketing has
been largely neglected. Documentary theatre is revealing of the ways in which
marketplace cultures can perpetuate social inequality. Involving local
communities in the co-production of knowledge in this way gives them a voice in
the policy arena not hitherto fully addressed in the marketing field. Similarly,
marketplace exclusion as a concept has been sidelined in favour of marketplace
discrimination and consumer vulnerability – the authors think it has the
potential to bring these fields together in exploring the range of dynamics
involved.
