Title: Patterns in Contemporary Canadian Picture Books: Radical Change in Action
Authors: Beverley Brenna, Shuwen Sun, Yina Liu
ID: openalex.W2779968814
URL: https://doi.org/10.37119/ojs2017.v23i2.365

This comprehensive qualitative examination of two groups of Canadian picture
books, 57 titles published in 2005 and 120 titles published in 2015, offers
comparative data that demonstrate patterns related to authors, illustrators,
characterization, genres, audiences, and particular elements of Radical Change.
Following book collection, content analysis was conducted with a consideration
of Dresang’s notion that books for children are evolving with respect to forms
and formats, perspectives, and boundaries. Our process for analysis was
developed from Berg’s framework of systematic content analysis based on
predetermined as well as emerging categories. There is much recent research
exploring particular content in children’s literature, supporting the central
importance of literature in the classroom and community. Comparative Canadian
studies across decades, however, are rare, and are increasingly important as a
way to track and describe the changes that are taking place with respect to
books for young people. It is interesting that in both 2005 and 2015, picture
books tended to feature children as protagonists, with the highest number of
books from the 2005 set utilizing the fantasy genre (at 34%) or realistic
fiction (at 28%) and the highest number of books from the 2015 set occurring in
non-fiction (at 34%, up from 16% in 2005) or fantasy (at 31%). Historical
fiction in both years presented comparatively low, at 12% and 3%,
respectively.Findings of this study support and extend the notion of Radical
Change. The research team noted marked innovations within the 2015 group related
to forms and formats, boundaries, and perspectives. Of particular note are the
increasing numbers of books that present Indigenous content and perspectives.
While many of the changes appearing in Canadian picture books between 2005 and
2015 might be predicted through the standard categories of Radical Change
(Dresang, 1999), other findings also emerged that suggest new Radical Change
considerations. Continuing to examine children’s literature as artifacts of a
culture can illuminate particular aspects of that culture and offer
opportunities to engage authors, illustrators, and publishers in filling gaps
where particular perspectives or topics are missing. Advocacy is important as
children’s literature continues to be a source of tension for what it portrays
and presents as well as its missing voices. A knowledge of patterns and trends
in relation to available content and resources supports classroom practice as
well as encourages classroom research and further explorations of the evolving
landscape of children's books.
