Title: Conversations with Family Members about Math.
Authors: Regina M. Mistretta
ID: openalex.W2746435015
URL: http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1146479.pdf

IntroductionStudents perform best when family members are part of the learning
process. For example, Jeynes (2013) points out the strong connection between
voluntary expressions of family engagement and positive school outcomes.
Engagement of this nature includes reading with one's child, setting high
expectations for academic achievement, and parenting styles that can improve
attendance (Sandefur & Wells, 1999), attitudes towards school (Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, 2012), and test scores (Strauss & Kohn,
2013).Math attitudes and achievement are particularly noted as benefiting from
home influences. For example, family members who pose thought-provoking
questions or break down a problem into smaller, more manageable pieces support
children in organizing their thinking (Walker, Shenker, & Hoover-Dempsey, 2010).
In addition, home environments that nurture children's self-confidence help
minimize math anxiety levels and, in turn, positively influence children's
academic success with math (Vukovic, Roberts, & Wright, 2013).Although family
engagement clearly matters, opportunities for families to meaningfully engage in
children's learning are sparse (Rivera & Waxman, 2011; Van Voorhis, 2011; Weiss,
Lopez, & Rosenberg, 2010). In fact, the amount of discussion, rhetoric, and
widespread agreement about the importance of family engagement far outweigh the
actual degree of change in schools' practices.Contributing to the situation are
prevailing school-centric family-school paradigms that portray educators
dictating passive family member roles such as monitoring children's behavior,
school attendance, homework completion, and television viewing. Oftentimes,
family members are positioned only as consumers of services and information from
schools, rather than as active collaborators in shaping learning environments
(Evans & Radina, 2014). Some go as far as to say that school practices for
involving family members serve more as a form of public relations, rather than a
means for cultivating meaningful partnerships with families (Knight-Abowitz,
2011).Compounding these conditions is a consistent lack of teacher preparation.
Even though federal and state policies call for equal partnerships between
families and schools at a systemic level, attention to building capacity among
all stakeholders to materialize such partnerships is lacking. Unfortunately,
principals and teachers receive little training for engaging families despite
the fact that family engagement is a high priority among school districts (Mapp
& Kuttner, 2013).Minimal attention is given to developing teachers'
understandings about family members' views on learning objectives, as well as
skills for meaningfully involving family members (Remillard & Jackson, 2006). In
addition, school leaders' attention is unfortunately and disturbingly directed
away from homeschool relationship building due to the pressures of meeting state
and national standards (Ferrara, 2009; Shirley & Evans, 2007).If these trends
continue, researchers warn that self-efficacy and authentic engagement
opportunities are at risk of being undermined, especially for low-income and
minority families (Hoover-Dempsey et al., 2005). Given the reformed mathematics
curriculum materials and family members' lack of familiarity with such
materials, family members may resort to assisting children in ways that only
mirror their own past learning environments, as opposed to that of current
classrooms (Remillard & Jackson, 2006).In this article, the author responds to
the need for equipping teachers with mindsets and skills for supporting families
with math. Specifically described is how practitioner inquiry opportunities
(conversations with family members about math) embedded into a mathematics
methods course informed teachers' practices for interacting with family
members.Findings from conversations facilitated by 72 teachers with 225 families
of public and nonpublic elementary, middle, and high school students demonstrate
how verbal dialogue enabled teachers to respond to circumstances surrounding the
home. …
