Title: A Study On Bharat Ratna Dr.M.G.Ramachandran’s Philosophical Film Songs With Special Reference to the Socialistic And Communistic Ideas It Contains - An Academic Comparative Analysis with the Theory of Socialism as Propounded by Karl Marx
Authors: P. Sarvaharana, P. Thiyagarajan, S. Manikandan
ID: openalex.W2776213730
URL: https://doi.org/10.5430/wjss.v5n1p46

Providing quality songs in movies has become paramount importance on the part of
film Producers and Directors. Of late the heroes of the movies are also
concerned about the contents of the song; as they play the main role in the
movies and are watched by millions of fans. Super-hero who attained matinée idol
status like Makkal Thilagam Bharat Ratna Dr.M.G.Ramachandran took upon himself
the responsibility of not only producing quality movies but also paid personal
attention to produce quality songs as he thought that good messages can be
disseminated through his film songs to millions of his fans. It is due to this
fact Bharat Ratna Dr.M.G.Ramachandran sought the assistance of eminent lyric-
writers like the great Kannadasan, Valli, Marudhakasi, Udumalai Narayana Kavi
and also encouraged other emerging writers like Na Muthulingam to write songs
for his movies. In view of such extraordinary efforts made by Puratchi Thalaivar
Dr.MG Ramachandran, his film songs contain ideas of ethics, education, equity
and justice (communism), eradication of corruptive practice. In this paper an
attempt has been made to deal with Twelve of such songs that contain SOCIALISTIC
AND COMMUNISTIC IDEAS and a comparative analysis has been made with the
Socialistic and Communistic theory as propounded by the Great Karl Marx. This
paper consist of:- Need of the Present Study; Scenario of Cinema; Scenario in
Tamil Film Industry; A Bird’s Eye View of Dr.M.G.Ramachandran’s life history.
After introducing Karl Marx, the theories propounded by him such as the
Alienation and Materialism are discussed; thereafter the Grounds for Comparison
has been arrived; then the efforts taken by Dr.MG.Ramachandran to produce
quality songs has been discussed. Finally a Comparative Analysis of the twelve
songs identified that contain the ideas of Socialism and Communism has been
discussed in detail.
