Title: A Reformulation of the Dual Career Conceptual Model for Analysis in an Organizational Scope: Revealing new Aspects
Authors: Heliani Berlato, Karen Correa
ID: openalex.W2593410186
URL: https://doi.org/10.15728/bbr.2017.14.2.5

Couples who live a dual career, in general, are characterized by their
continuing professional engagement and their desire for personal growth
together. It is a synergy between career aspirations and family sphere, so that
they co-exist; reflecting nowadays, a challenge for people who seek to live this
duality. Not exempt from it, it is possible to understand the need for
management models of people who are in harmony with the desires of dual career
couples who are part of organizations. If in the 1980s the existence of dual
career couples was not so common in Brazil, nowadays organizations increasingly
receive these couples, which impacts the need for people management models to
keep up with these social changes. Therefore, the model recognizes that the
personal dimension (impacts) on the organizational context cannot be avoided,
and also that other factors affect both spheres (personal and organizational)
when referring to the normative roles that permeate these areas. The main
intention of this essay is to construct a theoretical model of dual career to
consider the factor - organization, as vital to understand (and accept) the need
to consider other dimensions on the dual career analytical perspective. The
first evidences of dual career studies in Brazil revealed that the look at this
movement only from the individual's margin is limited. This way, to consider the
existence of other dimensions and consequently the influences they may cause,
favors an expansion of the perspective, and also brings a detailing about the
external factors (organization, society and culture) that influence the dual
career couple. To consider that this couple, as well as having personal
challenges in the relationship between work and family, is subject to the
culture that regulates their roles (men and women) and that directly influences
how organizations will handle that topic reveals the merit of this study. This,
in turn, draws attention to the organizational sphere and shows that it cannot
be detached from this reality. Considering that people management policies, that
include dual career couples, are emerging.
