Title: Teaching Preschool is Hard: Embodiment, Ideology, Fallibility and Futurity
Authors: Denise Nagle Bailey
ID: openalex.W2755109166
URL: https://hdl.handle.net/2027.42/136974

This dissertation examines adult-child relations in a way that challenges
prevalent understandings of adult power in childhood studies. It aims to examine
preschool teachers’ experiences under the same lens as children, as prescribed
within childhood studies paradigm -- which is to say, to extend them the same
openness to their experiences and perspectives in the research. The goal is to
provide a more balanced picture of adult-child interaction, where adult actions
that many childhood scholars might obscure or interpret as always-already
oppressive are considered from more positive angles. The author writes with an
eye toward re-valuing adults’ interactions alongside children both in the
subfield and the broader culture. Combining insights from childhood studies and
feminist scholarship, the author explores the particular embodied skills
entailed in the labor of teaching preschool, as well as the ideologies to which
teachers themselves subscribe and the theories that inform and are reflected in
them. Research was conducted at a preschool serving exclusively at-risk
children. The primary methods employed were ethnography and in-depth, semi-
structured interviews. Interviews were conducted with all eleven of the teachers
at the field site, as well as with the director of the preschool. Participant-
observation occurred in four of the six classrooms over a period of thirteen
months. Rapport between the researcher, teachers, and children developed
concomitantly, while the researcher’s own embodiment, especially her pregnancy,
lent emotional weight to the project, the work, and the rapport between herself
and the research participants. The first chapter provides a descriptive account
of the unique embodied skill sets that the preschool teachers developed through
repeated interactions with a “large N” of preschoolers. The author describes
these skills as “embodying the ideal preschooler,” which entails the enactment
of exaggerated friendliness and passive openness to children’s interaction
initiations, play preferences, and usages of adults’ bodies. The second chapter
explores how such practices map onto gender. The author aims to correct the
tendency in childhood studies, and especially childhood ethnography, to
disappear and devalue the feminine, caring aspects of adults’ everyday
interactions with children. She suggests ethnographers take up the "ideal carer
role," which better accounts for how adult interactions with children are
gendered. The third chapter explores three key theoretical moments in childhood
studies over the last 40 years, in particular their approaches to understanding
power and agency in adult-child relations. The author examines the relatively
rare moments of adult coercion of children at the preschool in order to show
which aspects of popular theories are reflected in, and thus best inform, these
experiences. She concludes by suggesting that childhood scholarship utilize
theories that most adequately explain the experiences of adults’ everyday
interactions with children, with special attention to their reflexivity and
fallibility.
