Title: An attachment theory-informed thematic analysis of bereaved families' narratives
Authors: Rachel Willcox
ID: openalex.W2753459903
URL: 

Attachment theory predicts that family bereavement leads even securely attached
individuals to experience temporary attachment insecurity. Attachment
in/security is displayed through the way narratives are constructed, and the
Adult Attachment Interview posits particular indices of ‘narrative incoherence’
for narratives related to experiences of bereavement. This thesis explores
bereaved families’ therapy narratives to see if they display signs of narrative
incoherence or evidence of lack of resolution as predicted by attachment theory.
The thesis also examines whether there is evidence of shifts and changes changes
in the stories over time that could be understood as reflecting a move towards
greater coherence. Families are dynamic systems and the stories told in family
therapy are co-creations between family members and the therapists: the impact
of the actions of family members and therapists on narrative coherence are also
analysed. Five bereaved families’ narratives were recorded during the therapy
intervention ‘Telling the Story’, at the beginning and towards the end of their
family bereavement therapy. An Attachment Theory informed Thematic Analysis was
carried out on the transcripts and identified four themes: Evidence of
Unresolved Loss, Creating Incoherence, Creating Coherence and Evidence of
Coherence. Results show that there is, as predicted by the Adult Attachment
Interview, evidence of narrative incoherence, and additionally there are
behavioural and systemic features that create further incoherence in the
narratives. The results also show how coherence can be created and what features
a more coherent family story includes. The findings have implications for
bereavement therapy interventions, therapist training and methodological
development. Limitations and suggestions for further research are also
discussed.
