Title: Voices of Labor: Creativity, Craft, and Conflict in Global Hollywood
Authors: Michael Curtin, Kevin Sanson
ID: openalex.W2592027688
URL: https://doi.org/10.1525/luminos.26

Motion pictures are <i>made</i>, not mass produced, requiring a remarkable
collection of skills, self-discipline, and sociality—all of which are sources of
enormous pride among Hollywood’s craft and creative workers. The interviews
collected here showcase the pleasures that attract people to careers in film and
television. They also reflect critically on changes in the workplace brought
about by corporate conglomeration and globalization. Rather than offer
publicity-friendly anecdotes by marquee celebrities, <i>Voices of Labor</i>
presents off-screen observations about the everyday realities of Global
Hollywood. Ranging across job categories—from showrunner to make-up artist to
location manager—this collection features voices of labor from Los Angeles,
Atlanta, Prague, and Vancouver. Together they show how abstract concepts like
conglomeration, financialization, and globalization are crucial tools for
understanding contemporary Hollywood and for reflecting more generally on
changes and challenges in the screen media workplace and our culture at large.
“Essential reading for anyone interested in how Hollywood actually works.” RAMON
LOBATO, author of <i>Shadow Economies of Cinema</i> “Michael Curtin and Kevin
Sanson craft a powerful elegy for organized labor, demonstrating how critical
theory is sung to the everyday rhythms of the workplace.” VICKI MAYER, author of
<i>Almost Hollywood, Nearly New Orleans: The Lure of the Local Film Economy</i>
“A star-studded cast with diverse talents, backgrounds, and perspectives tells a
varied but consistent tale of the importance of organized labor and the
challenges it faces when pitted against the forces of media consolidation and
globalization, all set in that magical company town known as Hollywood.” PATRIC
M. VERRONE, writer and producer, former president, Writers Guild of America,
West MICHAEL CURTIN is Duncan and Suzanne Mellichamp Professor of Film and Media
Studies and director of the Global Dynamics Initiative at University of
California, Santa Barbara. KEVIN SANSON is a senior lecturer in the Creative
Industries Faculty at Queensland University of Technology and managing editor of
Media Industries.
