Title: Coming of age in Khayelitsha: gendered identity, sexual partnerships and the transition to adulthood
Authors: Alison Swartz
ID: openalex.W2762103961
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/11427/25653

The lives of young people in Khayelitsha are characterised by a series of
intersecting challenges. These include inadequate access to education, limited
opportunities to find gainful employment, exposure to violence and the risk of
contracting HIV. Several conventional avenues of transition to adulthood, for
example achieving financial independence, moving out of the parental home or
getting married, remain unavailable to many. The majority thus find themselves
in a situation of waithood, an interminable period between childhood and
adulthood characterised by extreme uncertainty. This thesis takes up questions
of what it means to be a young man or woman navigating towards adulthood in this
context of socioeconomic marginalisation. In particular, it explores the ways
that youth negotiate the tensions between the structures that shape their lives
and their opportunities for agency within the domains of gendered identities and
sexual partnerships. Public health research and intervention with youth tends to
rely more heavily on approaches underpinned by individual-level behaviour change
theories, with lesser albeit growing attention paid to the structural forces
that shape young lives. This thesis aims to balance the reading of individuals'
capacity for agency in decision-making, with the broader structural forces that
shape their life trajectories. To this end, a longitudinal, ethnographic
approach was employed to capture nuances of context and experience as they
unfolded and shifted through time and space. The data presented here is drawn
from 18 months of ethnographic fieldwork with young people in the neighbourhood
of Town Two, Khayelitsha, primarily collected between 2014 and 2015. Youth
transition to adulthood is explored in the two interrelated domains of gendered
identity and sexual partnerships. Within these domains, living up to individual
and social ideals associated with masculinity and femininity is persistently
challenging. Faced with these challenges, young people employ creative and
dynamic strategies in their endeavours to maximize the precarious gains they
make in their transition towards adulthood. Broadly speaking, these strategies
include those linked to their physical bodies, sexual and social networks and
the ways that they invoke ideas about what it means to be a young South African
citizen. The findings highlight that in their transitions to adulthood, youth in
Khayelitsha are neither complete victims, nor entirely free agents with the
capacity to radically change their circumstances. This thesis ends by offering
some recommendations about how public health programming might take into account
the lived experiences of youth as they navigate the transition to adulthood in
this context.
