Title: Doing It by the Book: Teaching Sexuality in the Twelfth-Century Classroom
Authors: Emily Charlotte Vogl Blakelock
ID: openalex.W3009773745
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/1807/98775

This dissertation demonstrates the extent to which concepts of sexuality were
intertwined with teaching and learning in twelfth-century French schools, making
a vital connection between the history of education and that of gendered
sexuality. Learning, enculturation and socialization were combined in the new
urban schools of the twelfth century, in which boys underwent rigorous
grammatical and moral training while forming homosocial bonds with their
classmates and teachers. Students in their early- to mid- teens would routinely
read sexually explicit texts, such as Ovid’s Ars amatoria and Remedia amoris,
Terence’s Eunuchus, Statius’ Achilleid, and Juvenal’s satires, as part of their
training in Latin literacy. These classical Latin texts were categorized by
medieval teachers as “ethical” despite the fact that they contain depictions of
rape, adultery, prostitution, cross-dressing and male sodomy. I argue that such
discussions of sexuality were incorporated into the program of mores which
traditionally accompanied early education in grammatica. My research presents a
new perspective on socialization in medieval schools, using classroom texts and
commentaries which have rarely been examined as sources for the history of
sexuality. Starting with an overview of the role of the medieval school in male
social formation, I uncover the pedagogical discourse which connects grammar
with sexuality, and with the sexual status of the medieval adolescent student.
While Ovid identifies himself as a schoolteacher and establishes “rules” for
love and sex with the help of his medieval commentators, and Alan of Lille
describes sexual deviance as the result of mislearning the “grammar” of sex,
Statius and Terence highlight the inherent gender fluidity and erratic sexual
behaviour of adolescent boys, casting doubt on the stability of the boundaries
established by such regulatory mechanisms. Juvenal and his twelfth-century
commentators add to this discourse by implying that male sodomy is taught
through homosocial networks, and identifying adolescent boys as especially prone
to learning sodomy, with the school as the site of particular anxiety. These
perspectives reflect twelfth-century anxieties about clerical celibacy and
homosociality and demonstrate a medieval recognition of the social forces which
underpin both education and sexuality.
