Title: Evolutionary Musicology Meets Embodied Cognition: Biocultural Coevolution and the Enactive Origins of Human Musicality
Authors: Dylan van der Schyff, Andrea Schiavio
ID: openalex.W2758533448
URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2017.00519

Despite evolutionary musicology's interdisciplinary nature, and the diverse
methods it employs, the field has nevertheless tended to divide into two main
positions. Some argue that music should be understood as a naturally selected
adaptation, while others claim that music is a product of culture with little or
no relevance for the survival of the species. We review these arguments,
suggesting that while interesting and well-reasoned positions have been offered
on both sides of the debate, the nature-or-culture (or adaptation vs. non-
adaptation) assumptions that have traditionally driven the discussion have
resulted in a problematic <i>either/or</i> dichotomy. We then consider an
alternative "biocultural" proposal that appears to offer a way forward. As we
discuss, this approach draws on a range of research in theoretical biology,
archeology, neuroscience, embodied and ecological cognition, and dynamical
systems theory (DST), positing a more integrated model that sees biological and
cultural dimensions as aspects of the same evolving system. Following this, we
outline the enactive approach to cognition, discussing the ways it aligns with
the biocultural perspective. Put simply, the enactive approach posits a deep
continuity between mind and life, where cognitive processes are explored in
terms of how self-organizing living systems enact relationships with the
environment that are relevant to their survival and well-being. It highlights
the embodied and ecologically situated nature of living agents, as well as the
active role they play in their own developmental processes. Importantly, the
enactive approach sees cognitive and evolutionary processes as driven by a range
of interacting factors, including the socio-cultural forms of activity that
characterize the lives of more complex creatures such as ourselves. We offer
some suggestions for how this approach might enhance and extend the biocultural
model. To conclude we briefly consider the implications of this approach for
practical areas such as music education.
