Title: Sitting outside: Conviviality, self‐care and the design of benches in urban public space
Authors: Clare Rishbeth, Ben Rogaly
ID: openalex.W2760309499
URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/tran.12212

The urban bench has been romanticised as a location of intimacy and benign
social serendipity, and problematised with regard to perceptions of unwelcome
loitering. In this paper we explore embodied practices of sitting on benches
within an urban context characterised by corporate‐led regeneration and impacted
by austerity urbanism, imperial history and ongoing racisms. Our
schizocartographic methodology enables us to attend to the differentiated and
shifting subjectivities and temporalities of bench users, and to emerging
counter histories of space. The research is based on the case study of a central
square in Woolwich, south‐east London. This involved an eclectic combination of
methods, including film‐making, ethnography and interviews, and a cross‐sectoral
team of activists, academics and an artist. The paper starts by conceptualising
public space with respect to lived experiences of marginalisation, arguing that
architectural design is intrinsic to understanding micro‐geographies of
conviviality and care. The case study material is used first to provide a visual
sketch of sitting and watching others in the square and then to address
conviviality and the value of visibility and relative proximity in framing a
mostly un‐panicked multiculture. Third, we discuss agentic, yet critically
aware, acts of self‐care. Finally, our focus shifts to the design of the benches
and the “touching experiences” of bodies sat in various ways, impacted by
structural inequalities, yet differentiated by the particularities of individual
or collective priorities. In conclusion we argue that attending to the precision
of sitting on a bench can illuminate multiple temporalities of urban change in
relation to both individual subjectivities and hegemonic structures. Further,
the counter histories that emerge can inform policy and practice for inclusive
urban design.
