Title: Subject and subjects: conceptions of high school English
Authors: Michael James Dore
ID: openalex.W2943292422
URL: 

‘English’ as a high school subject discipline is a deeply contested space. Since
its inception in the early twentieth century, the discipline of English has
taken on many forms and purposes. From the preservation of grammatical standards
to the induction into high culture and creativity, it seems fair to say that few
subjects suffer such an identity crisis over their purpose and function as
English does. Added to this, the growing intensity in the politicisation of
educational practices has led to significant reforms in English curriculum and
assessment with a new GCSE course introduced recently. This thesis describes and
analyses debates in English teaching before using data gathered from my own
school to explore and evaluate how English is being created and what is
happening to its participants. To aid my analysis of what English is and its
purposes, I have chosen to use the ‘Four Discourses’ theory offered by Jacques
Lacan (1901-1981). Far from merely an exotic range of ideas, Lacan’s theory is
used here because it offers interesting explorations of subjectivity, language,
and insights into the unconscious. Basically, Lacan looks at four ways to see
human interactions in a social world: Master (governance over others),
University (institutions and how they deliver the Master’s messages), Hysteric
(protesting and objecting to the Master), and Analyst (revolutionary ways of
rebelling against the Master). The use of Lacan’s theory is not seen as a
panacea to educational complexities, but as offering alternative perspectives
and as having the capacity to generate new understanding. It would be tedious to
merely write diatribic invective and polemic about the surreptitious forces of
the master signifiers. Instead, the research looks at the effects upon and
within classroom English to create new understanding. Drawing on Lacan, I argue
that the ‘subject’ of English and how it makes its participants ‘subjects’ can
be seen in interesting ways. I use the Lacanian theory of ‘Four Discourses’ and
classroom data to interrogate the difficulties and opportunities presented in
navigating the new English curriculum.’
