Title: Earthworm disturbances : the reimagining of relations in Early Childhood Education and Care
Authors: Nikki Fairchild
ID: openalex.W2753860205
URL: 

This thesis explores the political and ethical entanglements of Early Years
Teachers with human and non-human worlds. Early Childhood Education and Care
(ECEC) policy, research and professional practice frame expected ways of working
with children. This highly-feminised workforce has historically been presented
as deficient. I argue this notion sees them as dehumanised subjects (Snaza,
2015), in need of constant upskilling. Posthumanist theorising was employed to
reveal Early Years Teachers in relations with other humans (children, teachers)
and non-humans (classroom, outdoor environments, objects, policy) forming more-
than-human subjectivities. A post-qualitative methodology was developed to
attend to more-than-human entanglements, with material-ethno-carto-graphy
proposed as a methodological undertaking pertinent to this inquiry. The
reconfigured methods-as-affinity-groups built on ethnography to explore
connections within/between four Early Years Teacher case studies. The resultant
data generated was mapped and read both literally and diffractively where glow
data (MacLure, 2010, 2013) was selected for diffractive
analysis.&#13;\n&#13;\n\tI theorised the positions of becoming-professional and
being-teacher to reveal how subjectivities take either a more material connected
or a more normative subject position and employ the metaphor of the earthworm to
debate these shifting forms. Data revealed becoming-professional and being-
teacher saw wider relational entanglements within indoor and outdoor spaces
drove new modes of professionalism. Furthermore, the influence of an online
tool, Tapestry, on subjectivities was explored. Additionally, vital agentic
materiality (Bennett, 2010) and cyborg figurations (Haraway, 1991) were
encountered in ECEC classrooms. Finally, the influence of nature has been
explored where Indigenous ontologies trouble traditional
vistas.&#13;\n&#13;\n\tGenerative ways to view the production of Early Years
Teacher subjectivities show that human and non-human worlds are always in flux.
The more-than-human moments reveal the interplay between becoming-professional
and being-teacher as a re-humanising enactment with subjectivities distributed
across human and material bodies. These relations are a counter movement to the
reified professional in policy, research and professional practice.
