Title: Nurturing in the Novels of Fanny Burney, Ann Radcliffe, and Ellen Price Wood.
Authors: Sarah Spence
ID: openalex.W2952585293
URL: https://doi.org/10.31390/gradschool_disstheses.5828

Employing attachment theory of contemporary psychology, I explore nurturing in
the novels of Fanny Burney, Ann Radcliffe, and Ellen Price Wood. The heroines'
need for nurturing manifests itself in diverse aspects of the genre. In the
mother's absence, various attachment figures, such as guardians, surrogate
mothers, sister/friend relationships serve as nurturer. In Fanny Burney's
novels, Evelina, Cecilia, and The Wanderer, fortune and a family name become
important societal goals. Joyce Hemlow's and Margaret Doody's works supply
criticism and biographical data. In Radcliffe's Gothic novels, The Mysteries of
Udolpho, and The Italian, the heroines' attachment bond is analyzed using Ellen
Moers' Gothic studies in Literary Women. The Victorian novel advances the "angel
in the house" theme: glorification of the wife/mother. Ellen Price Wood's East
Lynne demonstrates a woman's fall, her retribution, and her return as nurturer
of her children. The nurturance theme evolves from contemporary psychology and
"attachment theory," an "affectional tie" one person forms to another, binding
them in space and enduring over time. Although based on biological factors,
proponents emphasize relevance of "protection." Nurturing, cherishing, and
protecting form a foundation in the maturation process. Psychologist John
Bowlby's A Secure Base and Attachment and Loss serve as a basis for this study.
Mary D. Ainsworth, who strongly supports this theory, provides background in
Review of Child Development Research. The primary attachment can be transferred
to others when an individual loses this bond or finds himself in a chaotic or
frightening situation. Michael Lamb's work on transference and father/child
relationship in The Role of the Father in Child Development, as well as D. W.
Winnicott's clinical studies in Psycho-Analytic Explorations are applied. Freud
and Melanie Klein provide background for Bowlby's psycho-analytic theory. Nancy
Chodorow's theories, discussed in The Reproduction of Mothering feature how
"women's mothering is reproduced across generations.". Some feminist writing
emphasizes the way women's role has been downplayed; I show how the maternal
role is uplifted and how the nurturing quality upgrades the feminine. The novels
merge at a common interface: the heroines receive nurturing necessary for the
maturation process.
