Title: Identifying and Mitigating Machine Learning Biases for the Gravitational
Wave Detection Problem
Authors: Narenraju Nagarajan, Christopher Messenger
ID: 2501.13846
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.13846

Abstract:
Matched filtering is a long-standing technique for the optimal detection of
known signals in stationary Gaussian noise. However, it has known departures
from optimality when operating on unknown signals in real noise and suffers from
computational inefficiencies in its pursuit of near-optimality. A compelling
alternative that has emerged in recent years to address this problem is deep
learning. Although it has shown significant promise when applied to the search
for gravitational waves (GWs) in detector noise, we demonstrate the existence of
learning biases that hinder generalisation and lead to significant loss in
detection sensitivity. Our work identifies the sources of a set of 11
interconnected biases present in the supervised learning of the GW detection
problem and contributes mitigation tactics and training strategies to
concurrently address them. In light of the identified biases, we demonstrate
that existing detection sensitivity metrics are not reliable for machine-
learning (ML) pipelines and discuss the trustworthiness of previous results. We
use GW domain knowledge to build a bespoke ML based binary black hole search
pipeline called Sage that addresses these biases. Via the injection study
presented in the Machine Learning Gravitational-Wave Search Challenge, we show
that Sage detects ~11.2% more signals than the benchmark PyCBC analysis at a
false alarm rate of one per month in O3a noise. Moreover, we also show that it
can detect ~48.29% more signals than the previous best-performing ML pipeline on
the same dataset. We empirically prove that Sage can: [i] effectively handle
out-of-distribution noise power spectral densities, [ii] strongly reject non-
Gaussian transient noise artefacts, and [iii] achieve higher detection
sensitivities using less data than network architectures of a similar size. All
code and implementations are available at https://github.com/nnarenraju/sage.
