Title: Region-wise stacking ensembles for estimating brain-age using MRI
Authors: Georgios Antonopoulos, Shammi More, Simon B. Eickhoff, Federico
Raimondo, Kaustubh R. Patil
ID: 2501.10153
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.10153

Abstract:
Predictive modeling using structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data is a
prominent approach to study brain-aging. Machine learning algorithms and feature
extraction methods have been employed to improve predictions and explore healthy
and accelerated aging e.g. neurodegenerative and psychiatric disorders. The
high-dimensional MRI data pose challenges to building generalizable and
interpretable models as well as for data privacy. Common practices are
resampling or averaging voxels within predefined parcels, which reduces
anatomical specificity and biological interpretability as voxels within a region
may differently relate to aging. Effectively, naive fusion by averaging can
result in information loss and reduced accuracy. We present a conceptually novel
two-level stacking ensemble (SE) approach. The first level comprises regional
models for predicting individuals' age based on voxel-wise information, fused by
a second-level model yielding final predictions. Eight data fusion scenarios
were explored using as input Gray matter volume (GMV) estimates from four
datasets covering the adult lifespan. Performance, measured using mean absolute
error (MAE), R2, correlation and prediction bias, showed that SE outperformed
the region-wise averages. The best performance was obtained when first-level
regional predictions were obtained as out-of-sample predictions on the
application site with second-level models trained on independent and site-
specific data (MAE=4.75 vs baseline regional mean GMV MAE=5.68). Performance
improved as more datasets were used for training. First-level predictions showed
improved and more robust aging signal providing new biological insights and
enhanced data privacy. Overall, the SE improves accuracy compared to the
baseline while preserving or enhancing data privacy.
