Title: Simulation Streams: A Programming Paradigm for Controlling Large Language
Models and Building Complex Systems with Generative AI
Authors: Peter Sunehag, Joel Z. Leibo
ID: 2501.18668
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.18668

Abstract:
We introduce Simulation Streams, a programming paradigm designed to efficiently
control and leverage Large Language Models (LLMs) for complex, dynamic
simulations and agentic workflows. Our primary goal is to create a minimally
interfering framework that harnesses the agentic abilities of LLMs while
addressing their limitations in maintaining consistency, selectively
ignoring/including information, and enforcing strict world rules. Simulation
Streams achieves this through a state-based approach where variables are
modified in sequential steps by "operators," producing output on a recurring
format and adhering to consistent rules for state variables. This approach focus
the LLMs on defined tasks, while aiming to have the context stream remain "in-
distribution". The approach incorporates an Entity-Component-System (ECS)
architecture to write programs in a more intuitive manner, facilitating reuse of
workflows across different components and entities. This ECS approach enhances
the modularity of the output stream, allowing for complex, multi-entity
simulations while maintaining format consistency, information control, and rule
enforcement. It is supported by a custom editor that aids in creating, running,
and analyzing simulations. We demonstrate the versatility of simulation streams
through an illustrative example of an ongoing market economy simulation, a
social simulation of three characters playing a game of catch in a park and a
suite of classical reinforcement learning benchmark tasks. These examples
showcase Simulation Streams' ability to handle complex, evolving scenarios over
100s-1000s of iterations, facilitate comparisons between different agent
workflows and models, and maintain consistency and continued interesting
developments in LLM-driven simulations.
