Title: DeepExtractor: Time-domain reconstruction of signals and glitches in
gravitational wave data with deep learning
Authors: Tom Dooney, Harsh Narola, Stefano Bromuri, R. Lyana Curier, Chris Van
Den Broeck, Sarah Caudill, Daniel Stanley Tan
ID: 2501.18423
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.18423

Abstract:
Gravitational wave (GW) detectors, such as LIGO, Virgo, and KAGRA, detect faint
signals from distant astrophysical events. However, their high sensitivity also
makes them susceptible to background noise, which can obscure these signals.
This noise often includes transient artifacts called 'glitches', that can mimic
genuine astrophysical signals or mask their true characteristics. In this study,
we present DeepExtractor, a deep learning framework that is designed to
reconstruct signals and glitches with power exceeding interferometer noise,
regardless of their source. We design DeepExtractor to model the inherent noise
distribution of GW detectors, following conventional assumptions that the noise
is Gaussian and stationary over short time scales. It operates by predicting and
subtracting the noise component of the data, retaining only the clean
reconstruction of signal or glitch. We focus on applications related to glitches
and validate DeepExtractor's effectiveness through three experiments: (1)
reconstructing simulated glitches injected into simulated detector noise, (2)
comparing its performance with the state-of-the-art BayesWave algorithm, and (3)
analyzing real data from the Gravity Spy dataset to demonstrate effective glitch
subtraction from LIGO strain data. We further demonstrate its potential by
reconstructing three real GW events from LIGO's third observing run, without
being trained on GW waveforms. Our proposed model achieves a median mismatch of
only 0.9% for simulated glitches, outperforming several deep learning baselines.
Additionally, DeepExtractor surpasses BayesWave in glitch recovery, offering a
dramatic computational speedup by reconstructing one glitch sample in
approximately 0.1 seconds on a CPU, compared to BayesWave's processing time of
approximately one hour per glitch.
