Title: Accelerating Discovery of Solid-State Thin-Film Metal Dealloying for 3D
Nanoarchitecture Materials Design through Laser Thermal Gradient Treatment
Authors: Cheng-Chu Chung, Ruipeng Li, Gabriel M. Veith, Honghu Zhang, Fernando
Camino, Ming Lu, Nikhil Tiwale, Sheng Zhang, Kevin Yager, Yu-chen Karen Chen-
Wiegart
ID: 2501.13245
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.13245

Abstract:
Thin-film solid-state metal dealloying (thin-film SSMD) is a promising method
for fabricating nanostructures with controlled morphology and efficiency,
offering advantages over conventional bulk materials processing methods for
integration into practical applications. Although machine learning (ML) has
facilitated the design of dealloying systems, the selection of key thermal
treatment parameters for nanostructure formation remains largely unknown and
dependent on experimental trial and error. To overcome this challenge, a
workflow enabling high-throughput characterization of thermal treatment
parameters while probing local nanostructures of thin-film samples is needed. In
this work, a laser-based thermal treatment is demonstrated to create temperature
gradients on single thin-film samples of Nb-Al/Sc and Nb-Al/Cu. This continuous
thermal space enables observation of dealloying transitions and the resulting
nanostructures of interest. Through synchrotron X-ray multimodal and high-
throughput characterization, critical transitions and nanostructures can be
rapidly captured and subsequently verified using electron microscopy. The key
temperatures driving chemical reactions and morphological evolutions are clearly
identified within this framework. While the oxidation process may contribute to
nanostructure formation during thin-film treatment, the dealloying process at
the dealloying front involves interactions solely between the dealloying
elements, highlighting the availability and viability of the selected systems.
This approach enables efficient exploration of the dealloying process and
validation of ML predictions, thereby accelerating the discovery of thin-film
SSMD systems with targeted nanostructures.
