Title: What is a Social Media Bot? A Global Comparison of Bot and Human
Characteristics
Authors: Lynnette Hui Xian Ng, Kathleen M. Carley
ID: 2501.00855
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.00855

Abstract:
Chatter on social media is 20% bots and 80% humans. Chatter by bots and humans
is consistently different: bots tend to use linguistic cues that can be easily
automated while humans use cues that require dialogue understanding. Bots use
words that match the identities they choose to present, while humans may send
messages that are not related to the identities they present. Bots and humans
differ in their communication structure: sampled bots have a star interaction
structure, while sampled humans have a hierarchical structure. These conclusions
are based on a large-scale analysis of social media tweets across ~200mil users
across 7 events. Social media bots took the world by storm when social-
cybersecurity researchers realized that social media users not only consisted of
humans but also of artificial agents called bots. These bots wreck havoc online
by spreading disinformation and manipulating narratives. Most research on bots
are based on special-purposed definitions, mostly predicated on the event
studied. This article first begins by asking, "What is a bot?", and we study the
underlying principles of how bots are different from humans. We develop a first-
principle definition of a social media bot. With this definition as a premise,
we systematically compare characteristics between bots and humans across global
events, and reflect on how the software-programmed bot is an Artificial
Intelligent algorithm, and its potential for evolution as technology advances.
Based on our results, we provide recommendations for the use and regulation of
bots. Finally, we discuss open challenges and future directions: Detect, to
systematically identify these automated and potentially evolving bots;
Differentiate, to evaluate the goodness of the bot in terms of their content
postings and relationship interactions; Disrupt, to moderate the impact of
malicious bots.
