Title: RoMu4o: A Robotic Manipulation Unit For Orchard Operations Automating
Proximal Hyperspectral Leaf Sensing
Authors: Mehrad Mortazavi, David J. Cappelleri, Reza Ehsani
ID: 2501.10621
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.10621

Abstract:
Driven by the need to address labor shortages and meet the demands of a rapidly
growing population, robotic automation has become a critical component in
precision agriculture. Leaf-level hyperspectral spectroscopy is shown to be a
powerful tool for phenotyping, monitoring crop health, identifying essential
nutrients within plants as well as detecting diseases and water stress. This
work introduces RoMu4o, a robotic manipulation unit for orchard operations
offering an automated solution for proximal hyperspectral leaf sensing. This
ground robot is equipped with a 6DOF robotic arm and vision system for real-time
deep learning-based image processing and motion planning. We developed robust
perception and manipulation pipelines that enable the robot to successfully
grasp target leaves and perform spectroscopy. These frameworks operate
synergistically to identify and extract the 3D structure of leaves from an
observed batch of foliage, propose 6D poses, and generate collision-free
constraint-aware paths for precise leaf manipulation. The end-effector of the
arm features a compact design that integrates an independent lighting source
with a hyperspectral sensor, enabling high-fidelity data acquisition while
streamlining the calibration process for accurate measurements. Our ground robot
is engineered to operate in unstructured orchard environments. However, the
performance of the system is evaluated in both indoor and outdoor plant models.
The system demonstrated reliable performance for 1-LPB hyperspectral sampling,
achieving 95% success rate in lab trials and 79% in field trials. Field
experiments revealed an overall success rate of 70% for autonomous leaf grasping
and hyperspectral measurement in a pistachio orchard. The open-source repository
is available at: https://github.com/mehradmrt/UCM-AgBot-ROS2
