Title: Practical Design and Benchmarking of Generative AI Applications for
Surgical Billing and Coding
Authors: John C. Rollman, Bruce Rogers, Hamed Zaribafzadeh, Daniel Buckland,
Ursula Rogers, Jennifer Gagnon, Ozanan Meireles, Lindsay Jennings, Jim Bennett,
Jennifer Nicholson, Nandan Lad, Linda Cendales, Andreas Seas, Alessandro
Martinino, E. Shelley Hwang, Allan D. Kirk
ID: 2501.05479
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.05479

Abstract:
Background: Healthcare has many manual processes that can benefit from
automation and augmentation with Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI), the
medical billing and coding process. However, current foundational Large Language
Models (LLMs) perform poorly when tasked with generating accurate International
Classification of Diseases, 10th edition, Clinical Modification (ICD-10-CM) and
Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes. Additionally, there are many
security and financial challenges in the application of generative AI to
healthcare. We present a strategy for developing generative AI tools in
healthcare, specifically for medical billing and coding, that balances accuracy,
accessibility, and patient privacy.
  Methods: We fine tune the PHI-3 Mini and PHI-3 Medium LLMs using institutional
data and compare the results against the PHI-3 base model, a PHI-3 RAG
application, and GPT-4o. We use the post operative surgical report as input and
the patients billing claim the associated ICD-10, CPT, and Modifier codes as the
target result. Performance is measured by accuracy of code generation,
proportion of invalid codes, and the fidelity of the billing claim format.
  Results: Both fine-tuned models performed better or as well as GPT-4o. The
Phi-3 Medium fine-tuned model showed the best performance (ICD-10 Recall and
Precision: 72%, 72%; CPT Recall and Precision: 77%, 79%; Modifier Recall and
Precision: 63%, 64%). The Phi-3 Medium fine-tuned model only fabricated 1% of
ICD-10 codes and 0.6% of CPT codes generated.
  Conclusions: Our study shows that a small model that is fine-tuned on domain-
specific data for specific tasks using a simple set of open-source tools and
minimal technological and monetary requirements performs as well as the larger
contemporary consumer models.
