Title: Physics-Constrained Generative Artificial Intelligence for Rapid Takeoff
Trajectory Design
Authors: Samuel Sisk, Xiaosong Du
ID: 2501.03445
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.03445

Abstract:
To aid urban air mobility (UAM), electric vertical takeoff and landing (eVTOL)
aircraft are being targeted. Conventional multidisciplinary analysis and
optimization (MDAO) can be expensive, while surrogate-based optimization can
struggle with challenging physical constraints. This work proposes physics-
constrained generative adversarial networks (physicsGAN), to intelligently
parameterize the takeoff control profiles of an eVTOL aircraft and to transform
the original design space to a feasible space. Specifically, the transformed
feasible space refers to a space where all designs directly satisfy all design
constraints. The physicsGAN-enabled surrogate-based takeoff trajectory design
framework was demonstrated on the Airbus A3 Vahana. The physicsGAN generated
only feasible control profiles of power and wing angle in the feasible space
with around 98.9% of designs satisfying all constraints. The proposed design
framework obtained 99.6% accuracy compared with simulation-based optimal design
and took only 2.2 seconds, which reduced the computational time by around 200
times. Meanwhile, data-driven GAN-enabled surrogate-based optimization took 21.9
seconds using a derivative-free optimizer, which was around an order of
magnitude slower than the proposed framework. Moreover, the data-driven GAN-
based optimization using gradient-based optimizers could not consistently find
the optimal design during random trials and got stuck in an infeasible region,
which is problematic in real practice. Therefore, the proposed physicsGAN-based
design framework outperformed data-driven GAN-based design to the extent of
efficiency (2.2 seconds), optimality (99.6% accurate), and feasibility (100%
feasible). According to the literature review, this is the first physics-
constrained generative artificial intelligence enabled by surrogate models.
