Title: Quantum Computing from Graphs
Authors: Andrey Boris Khesin
ID: 2501.17959
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.17959

Abstract:
While stabilizer tableaus have proven exceptionally useful as a descriptive tool
for additive quantum codes, they offer little guidance for concrete
constructions or coding algorithm analysis. We introduce a representation of
stabilizer codes as graphs with certain structures. Specifically, the graphs
take a semi-bipartite form where input nodes map to output nodes, such that
output nodes may connect to each other but input nodes may not. Intuitively, the
graph's input-output edges represent information propagation of the encoder,
while output-output edges represent the code's entanglement. We prove that this
graph representation is in bijection with tableaus and give an efficient
compilation algorithm that transforms tableaus into graphs. We show that this
map is efficiently invertible, which gives a universal recipe for code
construction by finding graphs with nice properties. The graph representation
gives insight into both code construction and algorithms. To the former, we
argue that graphs provide a flexible platform for building codes. We construct
several constant-size codes and several infinite code families. We also use
graphs to extend the quantum Gilbert-Varshamov bound to a three-way distance-
rate-weight trade-off. To the latter, we show that key coding algorithms,
distance approximation, weight reduction, and decoding, are unified as instances
of a single optimization game on a graph. Moreover, key code properties such as
distance, weight, and encoding circuit depth, are all controlled by the graph
degree. We give efficient algorithms for producing encoding circuits whose
depths scale with the degree and for implementing certain logical diagonal and
Clifford gates with reduced depth. Finally, we find an efficient decoding
algorithm for certain classes of graphs. These results give evidence that graphs
are useful for the study of quantum computing and its implementations.
