Title: Towards Probabilistic Inference of Human Motor Intentions by Assistive
Mobile Robots Controlled via a Brain-Computer Interface
Authors: Xiaoshan Zhou, Carol M. Menassa, Vineet R. Kamat
ID: 2501.05610
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.05610

Abstract:
Assistive mobile robots are a transformative technology that helps persons with
disabilities regain the ability to move freely. Although autonomous wheelchairs
significantly reduce user effort, they still require human input to allow users
to maintain control and adapt to changing environments. Brain Computer Interface
(BCI) stands out as a highly user-friendly option that does not require physical
movement. Current BCI systems can understand whether users want to accelerate or
decelerate, but they implement these changes in discrete speed steps rather than
allowing for smooth, continuous velocity adjustments. This limitation prevents
the systems from mimicking the natural, fluid speed changes seen in human self-
paced motion. The authors aim to address this limitation by redesigning the
perception-action cycle in a BCI controlled robotic system: improving how the
robotic agent interprets the user's motion intentions (world state) and
implementing these actions in a way that better reflects natural physical
properties of motion, such as inertia and damping. The scope of this paper
focuses on the perception aspect. We asked and answered a normative question
"what computation should the robotic agent carry out to optimally perceive
incomplete or noisy sensory observations?" Empirical EEG data were collected,
and probabilistic representation that served as world state distributions were
learned and evaluated in a Generative Adversarial Network framework. The ROS
framework was established that connected with a Gazebo environment containing a
digital twin of an indoor space and a virtual model of a robotic wheelchair.
Signal processing and statistical analyses were implemented to identity the most
discriminative features in the spatial-spectral-temporal dimensions, which are
then used to construct the world model for the robotic agent to interpret user
motion intentions as a Bayesian observer.
