Title: Towards New Benchmark for AI Alignment & Sentiment Analysis in Socially
Important Issues: A Comparative Study of Human and LLMs in the Context of AGI
Authors: Ljubisa Bojic, Dylan Seychell, Milan Cabarkapa
ID: 2501.02531
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.02531

Abstract:
As general-purpose artificial intelligence systems become increasingly
integrated into society and are used for information seeking, content
generation, problem solving, textual analysis, coding, and running processes, it
is crucial to assess their long-term impact on humans. This research explores
the sentiment of large language models (LLMs) and humans toward artificial
general intelligence (AGI) using a Likert-scale survey. Seven LLMs, including
GPT-4 and Bard, were analyzed and compared with sentiment data from three
independent human sample populations. Temporal variations in sentiment were also
evaluated over three consecutive days. The results show a diversity in sentiment
scores among LLMs, ranging from 3.32 to 4.12 out of 5. GPT-4 recorded the most
positive sentiment toward AGI, while Bard leaned toward a neutral sentiment. In
contrast, the human samples showed a lower average sentiment of 2.97. The
analysis outlines potential conflicts of interest and biases in the sentiment
formation of LLMs, and indicates that LLMs could subtly influence societal
perceptions. To address the need for regulatory oversight and culturally
grounded assessments of AI systems, we introduce the Societal AI Alignment and
Sentiment Benchmark (SAAS-AI), which leverages multidimensional prompts and
empirically validated societal value frameworks to evaluate language model
outputs across temporal, model, and multilingual axes. This benchmark is
designed to guide policymakers and AI agencies, including within frameworks such
as the EU AI Act, by providing robust, actionable insights into AI alignment
with human values, public sentiment, and ethical norms at both national and
international levels. Future research should further refine the
operationalization of the SAAS-AI benchmark and systematically evaluate its
effectiveness through comprehensive empirical testing.
