Title: Computational modelling of biological systems now and then: revisiting
tools and visions from the beginning of the century
Authors: Axel Loewe, Peter J. Hunter, Peter Kohl
ID: 2501.13142
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.13142

Abstract:
Since the turn of the millennium, computational modelling of biological systems
has evolved remarkably and sees matured use spanning basic and clinical
research. While the topic of the peri-millennial debate about the virtues and
limitations of 'reductionism and integrationism' seems less controversial today,
a new apparent dichotomy dominates discussions: mechanistic vs. data-driven
modelling. In light of this distinction, we provide an overview of recent
achievements and new challenges with a focus on the cardiovascular system.
Attention has shifted from generating a universal model of the human to either
models of individual humans (digital twins) or entire cohorts of models
representative of clinical populations to enable in silico clinical trials.
Disease-specific parameterisation, inter-individual and intra-individual
variability, uncertainty quantification as well as interoperable, standardised,
and quality-controlled data are important issues today, which call for open
tools, data and metadata standards, as well as strong community interactions.
The quantitative, biophysical, and highly controlled approach provided by in
silico methods has become an integral part of physiological and medical
research. In silico methods have the potential to accelerate future progress
also in the fields of integrated multi-physics modelling, multi-scale models,
virtual cohort studies, and machine learning beyond what is feasible today. In
fact, mechanistic and data-driven modelling can complement each other
synergistically and fuel tomorrow's artificial intelligence applications to
further our understanding of physiology and disease mechanisms, to generate new
hypotheses and assess their plausibility, and thus to contribute to the
evolution of preventive, diagnostic, and therapeutic approaches.
