Title: Digital Twin for Smart Societies: A Catalyst for Inclusive and Accessible
Healthcare
Authors: Joshit Mohanty, Sujatha Alla,  Vaishali, Nagesh Bheesetty, Prasanthi
Chidipudi, Satya Prakash Chowdary Nandigam, Marisha Jmukhadze, Puneeth
Bheesetty, Narendra Lakshmana Gowda
ID: 2501.07570
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.07570

Abstract:
With rapid digitization and digitalization, drawing a fine line between the
digital and the physical world has become nearly impossible. It has become
essential more than ever to integrate all spheres of life into a single Digital
Thread to address pressing challenges of modern society: accessible and
inclusive healthcare in terms of equality and equity. Techno-social advancements
and mutual acceptance have enabled the infusion of digital models to simulate
social settings with minimum resource utilization to make effective decisions.
However, a significant gap exists in feeding back the models with appropriate
real-time changes. In other words, active behavioral modeling of modern society
is lacking, influencing community healthcare as a whole. By creating virtual
replicas of (physical) behavioral systems, digital twins can enable real-time
monitoring, simulation, and optimization of urban dynamics. This paper explores
the potential of digital twins to promote inclusive healthcare for evolving
smart cities. We argue that digital twins can be used to: Identify and address
disparities in access to healthcare services, Facilitate community
participation, Simulate the impact of urban policies and interventions on
different groups of people, and Aid policy-making bodies for better access to
healthcare. This paper proposes several ways to use digital twins to stitch the
actual and virtual societies. Several discussed concepts within this framework
envision an active, integrated, and synchronized community aware of data privacy
and security. The proposal also provides high-level step-wise transitions that
will enable this transformation.
