Title: BoxingGym: Benchmarking Progress in Automated Experimental Design and
Model Discovery
Authors: Kanishk Gandhi, Michael Y. Li, Lyle Goodyear, Agam Bhatia, Louise Li,
Aditi Bhaskar, Mohammed Zaman, Noah D. Goodman
ID: 2501.01540
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.01540

Abstract:
Understanding the world and explaining it with scientific theories is a central
aspiration of artificial intelligence research. Proposing theories, designing
experiments to test them, and then revising them based on data are fundamental
to scientific discovery. Despite the significant promise of LLM-based scientific
agents, no benchmarks systematically test LLM's ability to propose scientific
models, collect experimental data, and revise them in light of new data. We
introduce BoxingGym, a benchmark with 10 environments for systematically
evaluating both experimental design (e.g. collecting data to test a scientific
theory) and model discovery (e.g. proposing and revising scientific theories).
To enable tractable and quantitative evaluation, we implement each environment
as a generative probabilistic model with which a scientific agent can run
interactive experiments. These probabilistic models are drawn from various real-
world scientific domains ranging from psychology to ecology. To quantitatively
evaluate a scientific agent's ability to collect informative experimental data,
we compute the expected information gain (EIG), an information-theoretic
quantity which measures how much an experiment reduces uncertainty about the
parameters of a generative model. A good scientific theory is a concise and
predictive explanation. Therefore, to quantitatively evaluate model discovery,
we ask a scientific agent to explain their model and then assess whether this
explanation enables another scientific agent to make reliable predictions about
this environment. In addition to this explanation-based evaluation, we compute
standard model evaluation metrics such as prediction errors. We find that
current LLMs, such as GPT-4o, struggle with both experimental design and model
discovery. We find that augmenting the LLM-based agent with an explicit
statistical model does not reliably improve these results.
