Title: Data re-uploading in Quantum Machine Learning for time series:
application to traffic forecasting
Authors: Nikolaos Schetakis, Paolo Bonfini, Negin Alisoltani, Konstantinos
Blazakis, Symeon I. Tsintzos, Alexis Askitopoulos, Davit Aghamalyan, Panagiotis
Fafoutellis, Eleni I. Vlahogianni
ID: 2501.12776
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.12776

Abstract:
Accurate traffic forecasting plays a crucial role in modern Intelligent
Transportation Systems (ITS), as it enables real-time traffic flow management,
reduces congestion, and improves the overall efficiency of urban transportation
networks. With the rise of Quantum Machine Learning (QML), it has emerged a new
paradigm possessing the potential to enhance predictive capabilities beyond what
classical machine learning models can achieve. In the present work we pursue a
heuristic approach to explore the potential of QML, and focus on a specific
transport issue. In particular, as a case study we investigate a traffic
forecast task for a major urban area in Athens (Greece), for which we possess
high-resolution data. In this endeavor we explore the application of Quantum
Neural Networks (QNN), and, notably, we present the first application of quantum
data re-uploading in the context of transport forecasting. This technique allows
quantum models to better capture complex patterns, such as traffic dynamics, by
repeatedly encoding classical data into a quantum state. Aside from providing a
prediction model, we spend considerable effort in comparing the performance of
our hybrid quantum-classical neural networks with classical deep learning
approaches. Our results show that hybrid models achieve competitive accuracy
with state-of-the-art classical methods, especially when the number of qubits
and re-uploading blocks is increased. While the classical models demonstrate
lower computational demands, we provide evidence that increasing the complexity
of the quantum model improves predictive accuracy. These findings indicate that
QML techniques, and specifically the data re-uploading approach, hold promise
for advancing traffic forecasting models and could be instrumental in addressing
challenges inherent in ITS environments.
