Title: LP-ICP: General Localizability-Aware Point Cloud Registration for Robust
Localization in Extreme Unstructured Environments
Authors: Haosong Yue, Qingyuan Xu, Fei Chen, Jia Pan, Weihai Chen
ID: 2501.02580
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.02580

Abstract:
The Iterative Closest Point (ICP) algorithm is a crucial component of LiDAR-
based SLAM algorithms. However, its performance can be negatively affected in
unstructured environments that lack features and geometric structures, leading
to low accuracy and poor robustness in localization and mapping. It is known
that degeneracy caused by the lack of geometric constraints can lead to errors
in 6-DOF pose estimation along ill-conditioned directions. Therefore, there is a
need for a broader and more fine-grained degeneracy detection and handling
method. This paper proposes a new point cloud registration framework, LP-ICP,
that combines point-to-line and point-to-plane distance metrics in the ICP
algorithm, with localizability detection and handling. Rather than relying
solely on point-to-plane localizability information, LP-ICP enhances the
localizability analysis by incorporating a point-to-line metric, thereby
exploiting richer geometric constraints. It consists of a localizability
detection module and an optimization module. The localizability detection module
performs localizability analysis by utilizing the correspondences between edge
points (with low local smoothness) to lines and planar points (with high local
smoothness) to planes between the scan and the map. The localizability
contribution of individual correspondence constraints can be applied to a
broader range. The optimization module adds additional soft and hard constraints
to the optimization equations based on the localizability category. This allows
the pose to be constrained along ill-conditioned directions. The proposed method
is evaluated on simulation and real-world datasets, showing comparable or better
accuracy than the state-of-the art methods in tested scenarios. Observed
variations in partially localizable directions suggest the need for further
investigation on robustness and generalizability.
