Title: Automating RT Planning at Scale: High Quality Data For AI Training
Authors: Riqiang Gao, Mamadou Diallo, Han Liu, Anthony Magliari, Jonathan
Sackett, Wilko Verbakel, Sandra Meyers, Rafe Mcbeth, Masoud Zarepisheh, Simon
Arberet, Martin Kraus, Florin C. Ghesu, Ali Kamen
ID: 2501.11803
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.11803

Abstract:
Radiotherapy (RT) planning is complex, subjective, and time-intensive. Advances
with artificial intelligence (AI) promise to improve its precision and
efficiency, but progress is often limited by the scarcity of large, standardized
datasets. To address this, we introduce the Automated Iterative RT Planning
(AIRTP) system, a scalable solution for generating high-quality treatment plans.
This scalable solution is designed to generate substantial volumes of
consistently high-quality treatment plans, overcoming a key obstacle in the
advancement of AI-driven RT planning. Our AIRTP pipeline adheres to clinical
guidelines and automates essential steps, including organ-at-risk (OAR)
contouring, helper structure creation, beam setup, optimization, and plan
quality improvement, using AI integrated with RT planning software like Varian
Eclipse. Furthermore, a novel approach for determining optimization parameters
to reproduce 3D dose distributions, i.e. a method to convert dose predictions to
deliverable treatment plans constrained by machine limitations is proposed. A
comparative analysis of plan quality reveals that our automated pipeline
produces treatment plans of quality comparable to those generated manually,
which traditionally require several hours of labor per plan. Committed to public
research, the first data release of our AIRTP pipeline includes nine cohorts
covering head-and-neck and lung cancer sites to support an AAPM 2025 challenge.
To our best knowledge, this dataset features more than 10 times number of plans
compared to the largest existing well-curated public dataset. Repo:
https://github.com/RiqiangGao/GDP-HMM_AAPMChallenge.
