Title: Engaging with AI: How Interface Design Shapes Human-AI Collaboration in
High-Stakes Decision-Making
Authors: Zichen Chen, Yunhao Luo, Misha Sra
ID: 2501.16627
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.16627

Abstract:
As reliance on AI systems for decision-making grows, it becomes critical to
ensure that human users can appropriately balance trust in AI suggestions with
their own judgment, especially in high-stakes domains like healthcare. However,
human + AI teams have been shown to perform worse than AI alone, with evidence
indicating automation bias as the reason for poorer performance, particularly
because humans tend to follow AI's recommendations even when they are incorrect.
In many existing human + AI systems, decision-making support is typically
provided in the form of text explanations (XAI) to help users understand the
AI's reasoning. Since human decision-making often relies on System 1 thinking,
users may ignore or insufficiently engage with the explanations, leading to poor
decision-making. Previous research suggests that there is a need for new
approaches that encourage users to engage with the explanations and one proposed
method is the use of cognitive forcing functions (CFFs). In this work, we
examine how various decision-support mechanisms impact user engagement, trust,
and human-AI collaborative task performance in a diabetes management decision-
making scenario. In a controlled experiment with 108 participants, we evaluated
the effects of six decision-support mechanisms split into two categories of
explanations (text, visual) and four CFFs. Our findings reveal that mechanisms
like AI confidence levels, text explanations, and performance visualizations
enhanced human-AI collaborative task performance, and improved trust when AI
reasoning clues were provided. Mechanisms like human feedback and AI-driven
questions encouraged deeper reflection but often reduced task performance by
increasing cognitive effort, which in turn affected trust. Simple mechanisms
like visual explanations had little effect on trust, highlighting the importance
of striking a balance in CFF and XAI design.
