Title: Emergent Symbol-like Number Variables in Artificial Neural Networks
Authors: Satchel Grant, Noah D. Goodman, James L. McClelland
ID: 2501.06141
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.06141

Abstract:
What types of numeric representations emerge in neural systems, and what would a
satisfying answer to this question look like? In this work, we interpret Neural
Network (NN) solutions to sequence based number tasks using a variety of methods
to understand how well we can interpret them through the lens of interpretable
Symbolic Algorithms (SAs) -- precise programs describable by rules and typed,
mutable variables. We use autoregressive GRUs, LSTMs, and Transformers trained
on tasks where the correct tokens depend on numeric information only latent in
the task structure. We show through multiple causal and theoretical methods that
we can interpret raw NN activity through the lens of simplified SAs when we
frame the activity in terms of neural subspaces rather than individual neurons.
Using Distributed Alignment Search (DAS), we find that, depending on network
architecture, dimensionality, and task specifications, alignments with SA's can
be very high, or they can be only approximate, or fail altogether. We extend our
analytic toolkit to address the failure cases by expanding the DAS framework to
a broader class of alignment functions that more flexibly capture NN activity in
terms of interpretable variables from SAs, and we provide theoretic and
empirical explorations of Linear Alignment Functions (LAFs) in contrast to the
preexisting Orthogonal Alignment Functions (OAFs). Through analyses of specific
cases we confirm the usefulness of causal interventions on neural subspaces for
NN interpretability, and we show that recurrent models can develop graded,
symbol-like number variables in their neural activity. We further show that
shallow Transformers learn very different solutions than recurrent networks, and
we prove that such models must use anti-Markovian solutions -- solutions that do
not rely on cumulative, Markovian hidden states -- in the absence of sufficient
attention layers.
