Title: AI Governance InternationaL Evaluation Index (AGILE Index) 2024
Authors: Yi Zeng, Enmeng Lu, Xin Guan, Cunqing Huangfu, Zizhe Ruan, Ammar
Younas, Kang Sun, Xuan Tang, Yuwei Wang, Hongjie Suo, Dongqi Liang, Zhengqiang
Han, Aorigele Bao, Xiaoyang Guo, Jin Wang, Jiawei Xie, Yao Liang
ID: 2502.15859
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.15859

Abstract:
The rapid advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AI) technology is profoundly
transforming human society and concurrently presenting a series of ethical,
legal, and social issues. The effective governance of AI has become a crucial
global concern. Since 2022, the extensive deployment of generative AI,
particularly large language models, marked a new phase in AI governance.
Continuous efforts are being made by the international community in actively
addressing the novel challenges posed by these AI developments. As consensus on
international governance continues to be established and put into action, the
practical importance of conducting a global assessment of the state of AI
governance is progressively coming to light. In this context, we initiated the
development of the AI Governance InternationaL Evaluation Index (AGILE Index).
Adhering to the design principle, "the level of governance should match the
level of development," the inaugural evaluation of the AGILE Index commences
with an exploration of four foundational pillars: the development level of AI,
the AI governance environment, the AI governance instruments, and the AI
governance effectiveness. It covers 39 indicators across 18 dimensions to
comprehensively assess the AI governance level of 14 representative countries
globally. The index is utilized to delve into the status of AI governance to
date in 14 countries for the first batch of evaluation. The aim is to depict the
current state of AI governance in these countries through data scoring, assist
them in identifying their governance stage and uncovering governance issues, and
ultimately offer insights for the enhancement of their AI governance systems.
