Title: Event Segmentation Applications in Large Language Model Enabled Automated
Recall Assessments
Authors: Ryan A. Panela, Alex J. Barnett, Morgan D. Barense, Björn Herrmann
ID: 2502.13349
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.13349

Abstract:
Understanding how individuals perceive and recall information in their natural
environments is critical to understanding potential failures in perception
(e.g., sensory loss) and memory (e.g., dementia). Event segmentation, the
process of identifying distinct events within dynamic environments, is central
to how we perceive, encode, and recall experiences. This cognitive process not
only influences moment-to-moment comprehension but also shapes event specific
memory. Despite the importance of event segmentation and event memory, current
research methodologies rely heavily on human judgements for assessing
segmentation patterns and recall ability, which are subjective and time-
consuming. A few approaches have been introduced to automate event segmentation
and recall scoring, but validity with human responses and ease of implementation
require further advancements. To address these concerns, we leverage Large
Language Models (LLMs) to automate event segmentation and assess recall,
employing chat completion and text-embedding models, respectively. We validated
these models against human annotations and determined that LLMs can accurately
identify event boundaries, and that human event segmentation is more consistent
with LLMs than among humans themselves. Using this framework, we advanced an
automated approach for recall assessments which revealed semantic similarity
between segmented narrative events and participant recall can estimate recall
performance. Our findings demonstrate that LLMs can effectively simulate human
segmentation patterns and provide recall evaluations that are a scalable
alternative to manual scoring. This research opens novel avenues for studying
the intersection between perception, memory, and cognitive impairment using
methodologies driven by artificial intelligence.
