Title: PitVQA++: Vector Matrix-Low-Rank Adaptation for Open-Ended Visual
Question Answering in Pituitary Surgery
Authors: Runlong He, Danyal Z. Khan, Evangelos B. Mazomenos, Hani J. Marcus,
Danail Stoyanov, Matthew J. Clarkson, Mobarakol Islam
ID: 2502.14149
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.14149

Abstract:
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) in visual question answering (VQA) offer a unique
opportunity to enhance intra-operative decision-making, promote intuitive
interactions, and significantly advancing surgical education. However, the
development of VLMs for surgical VQA is challenging due to limited datasets and
the risk of overfitting and catastrophic forgetting during full fine-tuning of
pretrained weights. While parameter-efficient techniques like Low-Rank
Adaptation (LoRA) and Matrix of Rank Adaptation (MoRA) address adaptation
challenges, their uniform parameter distribution overlooks the feature hierarchy
in deep networks, where earlier layers, that learn general features, require
more parameters than later ones. This work introduces PitVQA++ with an open-
ended PitVQA dataset and vector matrix-low-rank adaptation (Vector-MoLoRA), an
innovative VLM fine-tuning approach for adapting GPT-2 to pituitary surgery.
Open-Ended PitVQA comprises around 101,803 frames from 25 procedural videos with
745,972 question-answer sentence pairs, covering key surgical elements such as
phase and step recognition, context understanding, tool detection, localization,
and interactions recognition. Vector-MoLoRA incorporates the principles of LoRA
and MoRA to develop a matrix-low-rank adaptation strategy that employs vector
ranking to allocate more parameters to earlier layers, gradually reducing them
in the later layers. Our approach, validated on the Open-Ended PitVQA and
EndoVis18-VQA datasets, effectively mitigates catastrophic forgetting while
significantly enhancing performance over recent baselines. Furthermore, our
risk-coverage analysis highlights its enhanced reliability and trustworthiness
in handling uncertain predictions. Our source code and dataset is available
at~\url{https://github.com/HRL-Mike/PitVQA-Plus}.
