Title: Earth Detecting Earth: At what distance could Earth's constellation of
technosignatures be detected with present-day technology?
Authors: Sofia Z. Sheikh, Macy J. Huston, Pinchen Fan, Jason T. Wright, Thomas
Beatty, Connor Martini, Ravi Kopparapu, Adam Frank
ID: 2502.02614
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.02614

Abstract:
The field of the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) searches for
``technosignatures'' that could provide the first detection of life beyond Earth
through the technology that an extraterrestrial intelligence (ETI) may have
created. Any given SETI survey, if no technosignatures are detected, should set
upper limits based on the kinds of technosignatures it should have been able to
detect; the sensitivity of many SETI searches requires that their target sources
(e.g., Dyson spheres or Kardashev II/III level radio transmitters) emit with
power far exceeding the kinds of technology humans have developed. In this
paper, we instead turn our gaze Earthward, minimizing the axis of extrapolation
by only considering transmission and detection methods commensurate with an
Earth-2024 level. We evaluate the maximum distance of detectability for various
present-day Earth technosignatures -- radio transmissions, atmospheric
technosignatures, optical and infrared signatures, and objects in space or on
planetary surfaces -- using only present-day Earth instruments, providing one of
the first fully cross-wavelength comparisons of the growing toolbox of SETI
techniques. In this framework, we find that Earth's space-detectable signatures
span 13 orders of magnitude in detectability, with intermittent, celestially-
targeted radio transmission (i.e., planetary radar) beating out its nearest non-
radio competitor by a factor of $10^3$ in detection distance. This work
highlights the growing range of ways that exoplanet technosignatures may be
expressed, the growing complexity and visibility of the human impact upon our
planet, and the continued importance of the radio frequencies in SETI.
