Title: An Innovative Next Activity Prediction Approach Using Process Entropy and
DAW-Transformer
Authors: Hadi Zare, Mostafa Abbasi, Maryam Ahang, Homayoun Najjaran
ID: 2502.10573
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.10573

Abstract:
Purpose - In Business Process Management (BPM), accurate prediction of the next
activities is vital for operational efficiency and decision-making. Current
Artificial Intelligence (AI)/Machine Learning (ML) models struggle with the
complexity and evolving nature of business process event logs, balancing
accuracy and interpretability. This paper proposes an entropy-driven model
selection approach and DAW-Transformer, which stands for Dynamic Attribute-Aware
Transformer, to integrate all attributes with a dynamic window for better
accuracy.
  Design/methodology/approach - This paper introduces a novel next-activity
prediction approach that uses process entropy to assess the complexity of event
logs and dynamically select the most suitable ML model. A new transformer-based
architecture with multi-head attention and dynamic windowing mechanism, DAW-
Transformer, is proposed to capture long-range dependencies and utilize all
relevant event log attributes. Experiments were conducted on six public
datasets, and the performance was evaluated with process entropy.
  Finding - The results demonstrate the effectiveness of the approach across
these publicly available datasets. DAW-Transformer achieved superior
performance, especially on high-entropy datasets such as Sepsis exceeding
Limited window Multi-Transformers by 4.69% and a benchmark CNN-LSTM-SAtt model
by 3.07%. For low-entropy datasets like Road Traffic Fine, simpler, more
interpretable algorithms like Random Forest performed nearly as well as the more
complex DAW-Transformer and offered better handling of imbalanced data and
improved explainability.
  Originality/ value - This work's novelty lies in the proposed DAW-Transformer,
with a dynamic window and considering all relevant attributes. Also, entropy-
driven selection methods offer a robust, accurate, and interpretable solution
for next-activity prediction.
