Title: Mapping Parameter Correlations in Spinning Binary Black Hole Mergers
Authors: Karen Kang, Simona J. Miller, Katerina Chatziioannou, Deborah Ferguson
ID: 2502.17402
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.17402

Abstract:
The spins of binary black holes measured with gravitational waves provide
insights about the formation, evolution, and dynamics of these systems. However,
interpreting these measurements-especially for heavy black holes-remains an open
problem. While the imprint of spin during the inspiral phase, where the black
holes are well-separated, is understood through analytic descriptions of the
dynamics, no such expressions exist for the merger. Though numerical relativity
simulations provide an exact solution (to within numerical error), the imprint
of the full six spin degrees of freedom on the signal is not transparent. In the
absence of analytic expressions for the merger and to advance our ability to
interpret massive binary black hole spin measurements, here we propose a
waveform-based approach. Leveraging a neural network to efficiently calculate
mismatches between waveforms, we identify regions in the parameter space of
spins and mass ratio that result in low mismatches and thus similar waveforms.
We map these regions with a Gaussian fit, thus identifying correlations and
quantifying their strength. For low-mass, inspiral-dominated systems, we recover
the known physical imprint: larger aligned spins are correlated with more equal
masses as they have opposite effects on the inspiral length. For high-mass,
merger-dominated signals, a qualitatively similar correlation is present, though
its shape is altered and strength decreases with larger total mass. Correlations
between in-plane spins and mass ratio follow a similar trend, with their shape
and strength altered as the mass increases. Our new methodology of waveform-
based correlation mapping provides a first step toward systematically modeling
spin effects in merger-dominated signals across the full intrinsic parameter-
space and motivates future effective spin parameters beyond the reach of
analytic methods.
