Title: From FAIR to CURE: Guidelines for Computational Models of Biological
Systems
Authors: Herbert M. Sauro, Eran Agmon, Michael L. Blinov, John H. Gennari, Joe
Hellerstein, Adel Heydarabadipour, Peter Hunter, Bartholomew E. Jardine,
Elebeoba May, David P. Nickerson, Lucian P. Smith, Gary D Bader, Frank Bergmann,
Patrick M. Boyle, Andreas Drager, James R. Faeder, Song Feng, Juliana Freire,
Fabian Frohlich, James A. Glazier, Thomas E. Gorochowski, Tomas Helikar, Stefan
Hoops, Princess Imoukhuede, Sarah M. Keating, Matthias Konig, Reinhard
Laubenbacher, Leslie M. Loew, Carlos F. Lopez, William W. Lytton, Andrew
McCulloch, Pedro Mendes, Chris J. Myers, Jerry G. Myers, Lealem Mulugeta, Anna
Niarakis, David D. van Niekerk, Brett G. Olivier, Alexander A. Patrie, Ellen M.
Quardokus, Nicole Radde, Johann M. Rohwer, Sven Sahle, James C. Schaff, T. J.
Sego, Janis Shin, Jacky L. Snoep, Rajanikanth Vadigepalli, H. Steve Wiley,
Dagmar Waltemath, Ion Moraru
ID: 2502.15597
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.15597

Abstract:
Guidelines for managing scientific data have been established under the FAIR
principles requiring that data be Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and
Reusable. In many scientific disciplines, especially computational biology, both
data and models are key to progress. For this reason, and recognizing that such
models are a very special type of 'data', we argue that computational models,
especially mechanistic models prevalent in medicine, physiology and systems
biology, deserve a complementary set of guidelines. We propose the CURE
principles, emphasizing that models should be Credible, Understandable,
Reproducible, and Extensible. We delve into each principle, discussing
verification, validation, and uncertainty quantification for model credibility;
the clarity of model descriptions and annotations for understandability;
adherence to standards and open science practices for reproducibility; and the
use of open standards and modular code for extensibility and reuse. We outline
recommended and baseline requirements for each aspect of CURE, aiming to enhance
the impact and trustworthiness of computational models, particularly in
biomedical applications where credibility is paramount. Our perspective
underscores the need for a more disciplined approach to modeling, aligning with
emerging trends such as Digital Twins and emphasizing the importance of data and
modeling standards for interoperability and reuse. Finally, we emphasize that
given the non-trivial effort required to implement the guidelines, the community
moves to automate as many of the guidelines as possible.
