Title: The "Who", "What", and "How" of Responsible AI Governance: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis of (Actor, Stage)-Specific Tools
Authors: Blaine Kuehnert, Rachel M. Kim, Jodi Forlizzi, Hoda Heidari
ID: 2502.13294
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.13294

Abstract:
The implementation of responsible AI in an organization is inherently complex
due to the involvement of multiple stakeholders, each with their unique set of
goals and responsibilities across the entire AI lifecycle. These
responsibilities are often ambiguously defined and assigned, leading to
confusion, miscommunication, and inefficiencies. Even when responsibilities are
clearly defined and assigned to specific roles, the corresponding AI actors lack
effective tools to support their execution.
  Toward closing these gaps, we present a systematic review and comprehensive
meta-analysis of the current state of responsible AI tools, focusing on their
alignment with specific stakeholder roles and their responsibilities in various
AI lifecycle stages. We categorize over 220 tools according to AI actors and
stages they address. Our findings reveal significant imbalances across the
stakeholder roles and lifecycle stages addressed. The vast majority of available
tools have been created to support AI designers and developers specifically
during data-centric and statistical modeling stages while neglecting other roles
such as institutional leadership, deployers, end-users, and impacted
communities, and stages such as value proposition and deployment. The uneven
distribution we describe here highlights critical gaps that currently exist in
responsible AI governance research and practice. Our analysis reveals that
despite the myriad of frameworks and tools for responsible AI, it remains
unclear \emph{who} within an organization and \emph{when} in the AI lifecycle a
tool applies. Furthermore, existing tools are rarely validated, leaving critical
gaps in their usability and effectiveness. These gaps provide a starting point
for researchers and practitioners to create more effective and holistic
approaches to responsible AI development and governance.
