Title: LLM-Powered Decentralized Generative Agents with Adaptive Hierarchical
Knowledge Graph for Cooperative Planning
Authors: Hanqing Yang, Jingdi Chen, Marie Siew, Tania Lorido-Botran, Carlee Joe-
Wong
ID: 2502.05453
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.05453

Abstract:
Developing intelligent agents for long-term cooperation in dynamic open-world
scenarios is a major challenge in multi-agent systems. Traditional Multi-agent
Reinforcement Learning (MARL) frameworks like centralized training decentralized
execution (CTDE) struggle with scalability and flexibility. They require
centralized long-term planning, which is difficult without custom reward
functions, and face challenges in processing multi-modal data. CTDE approaches
also assume fixed cooperation strategies, making them impractical in dynamic
environments where agents need to adapt and plan independently. To address
decentralized multi-agent cooperation, we propose Decentralized Adaptive
Knowledge Graph Memory and Structured Communication System (DAMCS) in a novel
Multi-agent Crafter environment. Our generative agents, powered by Large
Language Models (LLMs), are more scalable than traditional MARL agents by
leveraging external knowledge and language for long-term planning and reasoning.
Instead of fully sharing information from all past experiences, DAMCS introduces
a multi-modal memory system organized as a hierarchical knowledge graph and a
structured communication protocol to optimize agent cooperation. This allows
agents to reason from past interactions and share relevant information
efficiently. Experiments on novel multi-agent open-world tasks show that DAMCS
outperforms both MARL and LLM baselines in task efficiency and collaboration.
Compared to single-agent scenarios, the two-agent scenario achieves the same
goal with 63% fewer steps, and the six-agent scenario with 74% fewer steps,
highlighting the importance of adaptive memory and structured communication in
achieving long-term goals. We publicly release our project at:
https://happyeureka.github.io/damcs.
