Title: Habitable Zone and Atmosphere Retention Distance (HaZARD) Stellar-
evolution-dependent loss models of secondary atmospheres
Authors: Gwenaël Van Looveren, Sudeshna Boro Saikia, Oliver Herbort, Simon
Schleich, Manuel Güdel, Colin Johnstone, Kristina Kislyakova
ID: 2502.09702
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.09702

Abstract:
A major open question in exoplanet research is whether secondary atmospheres are
rare around Earth-sized rocky exoplanets. In this work we determine the distance
at which an Earth-sized planet orbiting a variety of stellar hosts could retain
a CO2- or N2-dominated atmosphere and compare this atmospheric retention
distance (ARD) with that of the liquid-water HZ. We combined planetary
atmosphere models with stellar evolution models. The atmospheric models produced
by the thermochemical Kompot code allowed us to calculate the Jeans escape rates
for different stellar masses, rotation rates, and ages. These loss rates allowed
us to determine the closest distance a planet is likely to retain a CO2- or
N2-dominated atmosphere. Using stellar rotation evolution models, we modelled
how these retention distances evolve as the X-ray and ultraviolet activity of
the star evolves. We find that the overlap of the HZ and the ARD occurs earlier
around slowly rotating stars. Additionally, we find that HZ planets orbiting
stars with masses under 0.4 M_\odot are unlikely to retain any atmosphere, due
to the lower spin-down rate of these fully convective stars. We also show that
the initial rotation rate of the star can impact the likelihood of a planet
retaining an atmosphere, as an initially fast-rotating star maintains high
levels of short-wavelength irradiance for much longer. The orbits of all Earth-
like rocky exoplanets observed by JWST in cycles 1 and 2, including HZ planets,
fall outside the ARD. Our results will have implications for future target
selections of small exoplanet observing programmes with JWST or future
instruments such as the Ariel space mission.
