Title: On the Emergence of Thinking in LLMs I: Searching for the Right Intuition
Authors: Guanghao Ye, Khiem Duc Pham, Xinzhi Zhang, Sivakanth Gopi, Baolin Peng,
Beibin Li, Janardhan Kulkarni, Huseyin A. Inan
ID: 2502.06773
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.06773

Abstract:
Recent AI advancements, such as OpenAI's new models, are transforming LLMs into
LRMs (Large Reasoning Models) that perform reasoning during inference, taking
extra time and compute for higher-quality outputs. We aim to uncover the
algorithmic framework for training LRMs. Methods like self-consistency, PRM, and
AlphaZero suggest reasoning as guided search. We ask: what is the simplest, most
scalable way to enable search in LLMs?
  We propose a post-training framework called Reinforcement Learning via Self-
Play (RLSP). RLSP involves three steps: (1) supervised fine-tuning with human or
synthetic demonstrations of the reasoning process, (2) using an exploration
reward signal to encourage diverse and efficient reasoning behaviors, and (3) RL
training with an outcome verifier to ensure correctness while preventing reward
hacking. Our key innovation is to decouple exploration and correctness signals
during PPO training, carefully balancing them to improve performance and
efficiency.
  Empirical studies in the math domain show that RLSP improves reasoning. On the
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct model, RLSP can boost performance by 23% in MATH-500 test
set; On AIME 2024 math problems, Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct improved by 10% due to
RLSP. However, a more important finding of this work is that the models trained
using RLSP, even with the simplest exploration reward that encourages the model
to take more intermediate steps, showed several emergent behaviors such as
backtracking, exploration of ideas, and verification. These findings demonstrate
that RLSP framework might be enough to enable emergence of complex reasoning
abilities in LLMs when scaled. Lastly, we propose a theory as to why RLSP search
strategy is more suitable for LLMs inspired by a remarkable result that says CoT
provably increases computational power of LLMs, which grows as the number of
steps in CoT \cite{li2024chain,merrill2023expresssive}.
