Title: A method for estimating forest carbon storage distribution density via
artificial intelligence generated content model
Authors: Zhenyu Yu, Jinnian Wang
ID: 2502.00783
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.00783

Abstract:
Forest is the most significant land-based carbon storage mechanism. The forest
carbon sink can effectively decrease the atmospheric CO2 concentration and
mitigate climate change. Remote sensing estimation not only ensures high
accuracy of data, but also enables large-scale area observation. Optical images
provide the possibility for long-term monitoring, which is a potential issue in
the future carbon storage estimation research. We chose Huize County, Qujing
City, Yunnan Province, China as the study area, took GF-1 WFV satellite image as
the data, introduced the KD-VGG module to extract the initial features, and
proposed the improved implicit diffusion model (IIDM). The results showed that:
(1) The VGG-19 module after knowledge distillation can realize the initial
feature extraction, reduce the inference time and improve the accuracy in the
case of reducing the number of model parameters. (2) The Attention + MLP module
was added for feature fusion to obtain the relationship between global and local
features and realized the restoration of high-fidelity images in the continuous
scale range. (3) The IIDM model proposed in this paper had the highest
estimation accuracy, with RMSE of 28.68, which was 13.16 higher than that of the
regression model, about 31.45%. In the estimation of carbon storage, the
generative model can extract deeper features, and its performance was
significantly better than other models. It demonstrated the feasibility of
artificial intelligence-generated content (AIGC) in the field of quantitative
remote sensing and provided valuable insights for the study of carbon
neutralization effect. By combining the actual characteristics of the forest,
the regional carbon storage estimation with a resolution of 16-meter was
utilized to provide a significant theoretical basis for the formulation of
forest carbon sink regulation.
