Title: Responsible Artificial Intelligence (RAI) in U.S. Federal Government :
Principles, Policies, and Practices
Authors: Atul Rawal, Katie Johnson, Curtis Mitchell, Michael Walton, Diamond
Nwankwo
ID: 2502.03470
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.03470

Abstract:
Artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) have made tremendous
advancements in the past decades. From simple recommendation systems to more
complex tumor identification systems, AI/ML systems have been utilized in a
plethora of applications. This rapid growth of AI/ML and its proliferation in
numerous private and public sector applications, while successful, has also
opened new challenges and obstacles for regulators. With almost little to no
human involvement required for some of the new decision-making AI/ML systems,
there is now a pressing need to ensure the responsible use of these systems.
Particularly in federal government use-cases, the use of AI technologies must be
carefully governed by appropriate transparency and accountability mechanisms.
This has given rise to new interdisciplinary fields of AI research such as
\textit{Responsible AI (RAI)}. In this position paper we provide a brief
overview of development in RAI and discuss some of the motivating principles
commonly explored in the field. An overview of the current regulatory landscape
relating to AI is also discussed with analysis of different Executive Orders,
policies and frameworks. We then present examples of how federal agencies are
aiming for the responsible use of AI, specifically we present use-case examples
of different projects and research from the Census Bureau on implementing the
responsible use of AI. We also provide a brief overview for a Responsible AI
Assessment Toolkit currently under-development aimed at helping federal agencies
operationalize RAI principles. Finally, a robust discussion on how different
policies/regulations map to RAI principles, along with challenges and
opportunities for regulation/governance of responsible AI within the federal
government is presented.
