Title: Results from NASA's First Radio Telescope on the Moon: Terrestrial
Technosignatures and the Low-Frequency Galactic Background Observed by ROLSES-1
Onboard the Odysseus Lander
Authors: Joshua J. Hibbard, Jack O. Burns, Robert MacDowall, Natchimuthuk
Gopalswamy, Scott A. Boardsen, William Farrell, Damon Bradley, Thomas M.
Schulszas, Johnny Dorigo Jones, David Rapetti, Jake D. Turner
ID: 2503.09842
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.09842

Abstract:
Radiowave Observations on the Lunar Surface of the photo-Electron Sheath
instrument (ROLSES- 1) onboard the Intuitive Machines' Odysseus lunar lander
represents NASA's first radio telescope on the Moon, and the first United States
spacecraft landing on the lunar surface in five decades. Despite a host of
challenges, ROLSES-1 managed to collect a small amount of data over fractions of
one day during cruise phase and two days on the lunar surface with four monopole
stacer antennas that were in a non-ideal deployment. All antennas recorded
shortwave radio transmissions breaking through the Earth's ionosphere -- or
terrestrial technosignatures -- from spectral and raw waveform data. These
technosignatures appear to be modulated by density fluctuations in the Earth's
ionosphere and could be used as markers when searching for extraterrestrial
intelligence from habitable exoplanets. After data reduction and marshaling a
host of statistical and sampling techniques, five minutes of raw waveforms from
the least noisy antenna were used to generate covariances constraining both the
antenna parameters and the amplitude of the low-frequency isotropic galactic
spectrum. ROLSES- 2 and LuSEE-Night, both lunar radio telescopes launching later
in the decade, will have significant upgrades from ROLSES-1 and will be set to
take unprecedented measurements of the low-frequency sky, lunar surface, and
constrain the cosmological 21-cm signal. ROLSES-1 represents a trailblazer for
lunar radio telescopes, and many of the statistical tools and data reduction
techniques presented in this work will be invaluable for upcoming lunar radio
telescope missions.
