Title: The Role of Quantum Measurements when Testing the Quantum Nature of
Gravity
Authors: Daisuke Miki, Youka Kaku, Yubao Liu, Yiqiu Ma, Yanbei Chen
ID: 2503.11882
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.11882

Abstract:
In order to test the quantum nature of gravity, it is essential to explore the
construction of classical gravity theories that are as consistent with
experiments as possible. In particular, the classical gravity field must receive
input regarding matter distribution. Previously, such input has been constructed
by taking expectation values of the matter density operator or by using the
outcomes of all measurements being performed on the quantum system. We propose a
framework that unifies these models, and argue that the Causal Conditional
Formulation of Schroedinger-Newton (CCSN) theory, which takes classical inputs
only from experimental and environmental channels, is a minimum model within
this framework. Since CCSN can be viewed as a quantum feedback control scheme,
it can be made causal and free from pathologies that previously plagued SN
theories. Since classical information from measurement results are used to
generate classical gravity, CCSN can mimic quantum gravity better than one would
naively expect for a classical theory. We predict experimental signatures of
CCSN in two concrete scenarios: (i) a single test mass and (ii) two objects
interacting via mutual gravity. In case (i), we show that the mass-concentration
effect of self classical gravity still makes CCSN much easier to test than
testing the mutual entanglement, yet the signatures are more subtle than
previously thought for classical gravity theories. Using time-delayed and non-
stationary measurements, which delay or suspend the flow of classical
information into classical gravity, one can make CCSN more detectable. In case
(ii), we show that mutual gravity generated by CCSN can lead to correlations
that largely mimic signatures of quantum entanglement. Rigorous protocols that
rule out LOCC channels, which are experimentally more challenging than simply
testing entanglement, must be applied to completely rule out CCSN.
