Title: Capturing Lifecycle System Degradation in Digital Twin Model Updating
Authors: Yifan Tang, Mostafa Rahmani Dehaghani, G. Gary Wang
ID: 2503.08953
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.08953

Abstract:
Digital twin (DT) has emerged as a powerful tool to facilitate monitoring,
control, and other decision-making tasks in real-world engineering systems.
Online update methods have been proposed to update DT models. Considering the
degradation behavior in the system lifecycle, these methods fail to enable DT
models to predict the system responses affected by the system degradation over
time. To alleviate this problem, degradation models of measurable parameters
have been integrated into DT construction. However, identifying the degradation
parameters relies on prior knowledge of the system and expensive experiments. To
mitigate those limitations, this paper proposes a lifelong update method for DT
models to capture the effects of system degradation on system responses without
any prior knowledge and expensive offline experiments on the system. The core
idea in the work is to represent the system degradation during the lifecycle as
the dynamic changes of DT configurations (i.e., model parameters with a fixed
model structure) at all degradation stages. During the lifelong update process,
an Autoencoder is adopted to reconstruct the model parameters of all hidden
layers simultaneously, so that the latent features taking into account the
dependencies among hidden layers are obtained for each degradation stage. The
dynamic behavior of latent features among successive degradation stages is then
captured by a long short-term memory model, which enables prediction of the
latent feature at any unseen stage. Based on the predicted latent features, the
model configuration at future degradation stage is reconstructed to determine
the new DT model, which predicts the system responses affected by the
degradation at the same stage. The test results on two engineering datasets
demonstrate that the proposed update method could capture effects of system
degradation on system responses during the lifecycle.
