Title: Evaluation of (Un-)Supervised Machine Learning Methods for GNSS
Interference Classification with Real-World Data Discrepancies
Authors: Lucas Heublein, Nisha L. Raichur, Tobias Feigl, Tobias Brieger, Fin
Heuer, Lennart Asbach, Alexander Rügamer, Felix Ott
ID: 2503.23775
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.23775

Abstract:
The accuracy and reliability of vehicle localization on roads are crucial for
applications such as self-driving cars, toll systems, and digital tachographs.
To achieve accurate positioning, vehicles typically use global navigation
satellite system (GNSS) receivers to validate their absolute positions. However,
GNSS-based positioning can be compromised by interference signals, necessitating
the identification, classification, determination of purpose, and localization
of such interference to mitigate or eliminate it. Recent approaches based on
machine learning (ML) have shown superior performance in monitoring
interference. However, their feasibility in real-world applications and
environments has yet to be assessed. Effective implementation of ML techniques
requires training datasets that incorporate realistic interference signals,
including real-world noise and potential multipath effects that may occur
between transmitter, receiver, and satellite in the operational area.
Additionally, these datasets require reference labels. Creating such datasets is
often challenging due to legal restrictions, as causing interference to GNSS
sources is strictly prohibited. Consequently, the performance of ML-based
methods in practical applications remains unclear. To address this gap, we
describe a series of large-scale measurement campaigns conducted in real-world
settings at two highway locations in Germany and the Seetal Alps in Austria, and
in large-scale controlled indoor environments. We evaluate the latest supervised
ML-based methods to report on their performance in real-world settings and
present the applicability of pseudo-labeling for unsupervised learning. We
demonstrate the challenges of combining datasets due to data discrepancies and
evaluate outlier detection, domain adaptation, and data augmentation techniques
to present the models' capabilities to adapt to changes in the datasets.
