Title: Metastability and Ostwald Step Rule in the Crystallisation of Diamond and
Graphite from Molten Carbon
Authors: Davide Donadio, Margaret L. Berrens, Wanyu Zhao, Shunda Chen, Tianshu
Li
ID: 2503.02069
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.02069

Abstract:
The crystallisation of carbon from the melt under extreme conditions is highly
relevant to earth and planetary science, materials manufacturing, and nuclear
fusion research. The thermodynamic conditions near the graphite-diamond-liquid
(GDL) triple point are especially of interest for geological and technological
applications, but high-pressure flash heating experiments aiming to resolve this
region of the phase diagram of carbon exhibit large discrepancies. Experimental
challenges are often related to the persistence of metastable crystalline or
glassy phases, superheated crystals, or supercooled liquids. A deeper
understanding of the crystallisation kinetics of diamond and graphite is crucial
for effectively interpreting the outcomes of these experiments. Here, we reveal
the microscopic mechanisms of diamond and graphite nucleation from liquid carbon
through molecular simulations with first-principles machine learning potentials.
Our simulations accurately reproduce the experimental phase diagram of carbon in
the region around the GDL triple point and show that liquid carbon crystallises
spontaneously upon cooling at constant pressure. Surprisingly, metastable
graphite crystallises in the domain of diamond thermodynamic stability at
pressures above the triple point. Furthermore, whereas diamond crystallises
through a classical nucleation pathway, graphite follows a two-step process in
which low-density fluctuations forego ordering. Calculations of the nucleation
rates of the two competing phases confirm this result and reveal a manifestation
of Ostwald's step rule where the strong metastability of graphite hinders the
transformation to the stable diamond phase. Our results provide a new key to
interpreting melting and recrystallisation experiments and shed light on
nucleation kinetics in polymorphic materials with deep metastable states.
