Title: A Semantic-Loss Function Modeling Framework With Task-Oriented Machine
Learning Perspectives
Authors: Ti Ti Nguyen, Thanh-Dung Le, Vu Nguyen Ha, Hong-fu Chou, Geoffrey
Eappen, Duc-Dung Tran, Hung Nguyen-Kha, Prabhu Thiruvasagam, Luis M. Garces-
Socarras, Jorge L. Gonzalez-Rios, Juan C. Merlano-Duncan, Symeon Chatzinotas
ID: 2503.09903
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.09903

Abstract:
The integration of machine learning (ML) has significantly enhanced the
capabilities of Earth Observation (EO) systems by enabling the extraction of
actionable insights from complex datasets. However, the performance of data-
driven EO applications is heavily influenced by the data collection and
transmission processes, where limited satellite bandwidth and latency
constraints can hinder the full transmission of original data to the receivers.
To address this issue, adopting the concepts of Semantic Communication (SC)
offers a promising solution by prioritizing the transmission of essential data
semantics over raw information. Implementing SC for EO systems requires a
thorough understanding of the impact of data processing and communication
channel conditions on semantic loss at the processing center. This work proposes
a novel data-fitting framework to empirically model the semantic loss using
real-world EO datasets and domain-specific insights. The framework quantifies
two primary types of semantic loss: (1) source coding loss, assessed via a data
quality indicator measuring the impact of processing on raw source data, and (2)
transmission loss, evaluated by comparing practical transmission performance
against the Shannon limit. Semantic losses are estimated by evaluating the
accuracy of EO applications using four task-oriented ML models, EfficientViT,
MobileViT, ResNet50-DINO, and ResNet8-KD, on lossy image datasets under varying
channel conditions and compression ratios. These results underpin a framework
for efficient semantic-loss modeling in bandwidth-constrained EO scenarios,
enabling more reliable and effective operations.
