Title: Generating Robot Constitutions & Benchmarks for Semantic Safety
Authors: Pierre Sermanet, Anirudha Majumdar, Alex Irpan, Dmitry Kalashnikov,
Vikas Sindhwani
ID: 2503.08663
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.08663

Abstract:
Until recently, robotics safety research was predominantly about collision
avoidance and hazard reduction in the immediate vicinity of a robot. Since the
advent of large vision and language models (VLMs), robots are now also capable
of higher-level semantic scene understanding and natural language interactions
with humans. Despite their known vulnerabilities (e.g. hallucinations or jail-
breaking), VLMs are being handed control of robots capable of physical contact
with the real world. This can lead to dangerous behaviors, making semantic
safety for robots a matter of immediate concern. Our contributions in this paper
are two fold: first, to address these emerging risks, we release the ASIMOV
Benchmark, a large-scale and comprehensive collection of datasets for evaluating
and improving semantic safety of foundation models serving as robot brains. Our
data generation recipe is highly scalable: by leveraging text and image
generation techniques, we generate undesirable situations from real-world visual
scenes and human injury reports from hospitals. Secondly, we develop a framework
to automatically generate robot constitutions from real-world data to steer a
robot's behavior using Constitutional AI mechanisms. We propose a novel auto-
amending process that is able to introduce nuances in written rules of behavior;
this can lead to increased alignment with human preferences on behavior
desirability and safety. We explore trade-offs between generality and
specificity across a diverse set of constitutions of different lengths, and
demonstrate that a robot is able to effectively reject unconstitutional actions.
We measure a top alignment rate of 84.3% on the ASIMOV Benchmark using generated
constitutions, outperforming no-constitution baselines and human-written
constitutions. Data is available at asimov-benchmark.github.io
