Title: On the (im)possibility of sustainable artificial intelligence. Why it
does not make sense to move faster when heading the wrong way
Authors: Rainer Rehak
ID: 2503.17702
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.17702

Abstract:
Artificial intelligence (AI) is currently considered a sustainability "game-
changer" within and outside of academia. In order to discuss sustainable AI this
article draws from insights by critical data and algorithm studies, STS,
transformative sustainability science, critical computer science, and public
interest theory. I argue that while there are indeed many sustainability-related
use cases for AI, they are likely to have more overall drawbacks than benefits.
To substantiate this claim, I differentiate three 'AI materialities' of the AI
supply chain: first the literal materiality (e.g. water, cobalt, lithium, energy
consumption etc.), second, the informational materiality (e.g. lots of data and
centralised control necessary), and third, the social materiality (e.g.
exploitative data work, communities harm by waste and pollution). In all
materialities, effects are especially devastating for the global south while
benefiting the global north. A second strong claim regarding sustainable AI
circles around so called apolitical optimisation (e.g. regarding city traffic),
however the optimisation criteria (e.g. cars, bikes, emissions, commute time,
health) are purely political and have to be collectively negotiated before
applying AI optimisation. Hence, sustainable AI, in principle, cannot break the
glass ceiling of transformation and might even distract from necessary societal
change. To address that I propose to stop 'unformation gathering' and to apply
the 'small is beautiful' principle. This aims to contribute to an informed
academic and collective negotiation on how to (not) integrate AI into the
sustainability project while avoiding to reproduce the status quo by serving
hegemonic interests between useful AI use cases, techno-utopian salvation
narratives, technology-centred efficiency paradigms, the exploitative and
extractivist character of AI and concepts of digital degrowth.
