Title: Online Reasoning Video Segmentation with Just-in-Time Digital Twins
Authors: Yiqing Shen, Bohan Liu, Chenjia Li, Lalithkumar Seenivasan, Mathias
Unberath
ID: 2503.21056
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.21056

Abstract:
Reasoning segmentation (RS) aims to identify and segment objects of interest
based on implicit text queries. As such, RS is a catalyst for embodied AI
agents, enabling them to interpret high-level commands without requiring
explicit step-by-step guidance. However, current RS approaches rely heavily on
the visual perception capabilities of multimodal large language models (LLMs),
leading to several major limitations. First, they struggle with queries that
require multiple steps of reasoning or those that involve complex
spatial/temporal relationships. Second, they necessitate LLM fine-tuning, which
may require frequent updates to maintain compatibility with contemporary LLMs
and may increase risks of catastrophic forgetting during fine-tuning. Finally,
being primarily designed for static images or offline video processing, they
scale poorly to online video data. To address these limitations, we propose an
agent framework that disentangles perception and reasoning for online video RS
without LLM fine-tuning. Our innovation is the introduction of a just-in-time
digital twin concept, where -- given an implicit query -- a LLM plans the
construction of a low-level scene representation from high-level video using
specialist vision models. We refer to this approach to creating a digital twin
as "just-in-time" because the LLM planner will anticipate the need for specific
information and only request this limited subset instead of always evaluating
every specialist model. The LLM then performs reasoning on this digital twin
representation to identify target objects. To evaluate our approach, we
introduce a new comprehensive video reasoning segmentation benchmark comprising
200 videos with 895 implicit text queries. The benchmark spans three reasoning
categories (semantic, spatial, and temporal) with three different reasoning
chain complexity.
