Title: The Backfiring Effect of Weak AI Safety Regulation
Authors: Benjamin Laufer, Jon Kleinberg, Hoda Heidari
ID: 2503.20848
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.20848

Abstract:
Recent policy proposals aim to improve the safety of general-purpose AI, but
there is little understanding of the efficacy of different regulatory approaches
to AI safety. We present a strategic model that explores the interactions
between safety regulation, the general-purpose AI creators, and domain
specialists--those who adapt the technology for specific applications. Our
analysis examines how different regulatory measures, targeting different parts
of the AI development chain, affect the outcome of this game. In particular, we
assume AI technology is characterized by two key attributes: safety and
performance. The regulator first sets a minimum safety standard that applies to
one or both players, with strict penalties for non-compliance. The general-
purpose creator then invests in the technology, establishing its initial safety
and performance levels. Next, domain specialists refine the AI for their
specific use cases, updating the safety and performance levels and taking the
product to market. The resulting revenue is then distributed between the
specialist and generalist through a revenue-sharing parameter. Our analysis
reveals two key insights: First, weak safety regulation imposed predominantly on
domain specialists can backfire. While it might seem logical to regulate AI use
cases, our analysis shows that weak regulations targeting domain specialists
alone can unintentionally reduce safety. This effect persists across a wide
range of settings. Second, in sharp contrast to the previous finding, we observe
that stronger, well-placed regulation can in fact mutually benefit all players
subjected to it. When regulators impose appropriate safety standards on both
general-purpose AI creators and domain specialists, the regulation functions as
a commitment device, leading to safety and performance gains, surpassing what is
achieved under no regulation or regulating one player alone.
