Title: Quality In, Quality Out: Investigating Training Data's Role in AI Code
Generation
Authors: Cristina Improta, Rosalia Tufano, Pietro Liguori, Domenico Cotroneo,
Gabriele Bavota
ID: 2503.11402
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.11402

Abstract:
Deep Learning-based code generators have seen significant advancements in recent
years. Tools such as GitHub Copilot are used by thousands of developers with the
main promise of a boost in productivity. However, researchers have recently
questioned their impact on code quality showing, for example, that code
generated by DL-based tools may be affected by security vulnerabilities. Since
DL models are trained on large code corpora, one may conjecture that low-quality
code they output is the result of low-quality code they have seen during
training. However, there is very little empirical evidence documenting this
phenomenon. Indeed, most of previous work look at the frequency with which
commercial code generators recommend low-quality code without the possibility of
relating this to their training set. We investigate the extent to which low-
quality code instances seen during training affect the quality of the code
generated at inference time. We start by fine-tuning a pre-trained DL model on a
large-scale dataset being representative of those usually adopted in the
training of code generators. We show that 4.98% of functions in this dataset
exhibit one or more quality issues related to security, maintainability, best
practices, etc. We use the fine-tuned model to generate 551k Python functions,
showing that 5.85% of them are affected by at least one quality issue. We then
remove from the training set the low-quality functions, and use the cleaned
dataset to fine-tune a second model which has been used to generate the same
551k Python functions. We show that the model trained on the cleaned dataset
exhibits similar performance in terms of functional correctness as compared to
the original model while, however, generating a statistically significant lower
number of low-quality functions (2.16%). Our study empirically documents the
importance of high-quality training data for code generators.
