Title: Assessing Student Adoption of Generative Artificial Intelligence across
Engineering Education from 2023 to 2024
Authors: Jesan Ahammed Ovi, Gabe Fierro, C. Estelle Smith
ID: 2503.04696
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.04696

Abstract:
Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) tools and models have the potential
to re-shape educational needs, norms, practices, and policies in all sectors of
engineering education. Empirical data, rather than anecdata and assumptions, on
how engineering students have adopted GenAI is essential to developing a
foundational understanding of students' GenAI-related behaviors and needs during
academic training. This data will also help formulate effective responses to
GenAI by both academic institutions and industrial employers. We collected two
representative survey samples at the Colorado School of Mines, a small
engineering-focused R-1 university in the USA, in May 2023 ($n_1=601$) and
September 2024 ($n_2=862$) to address research questions related to (RQ1) how
GenAI has been adopted by engineering students, including motivational and
demographic factors contributing to GenAI use, (RQ2) students' ethical concerns
about GenAI, and (RQ3) students' perceived benefits v.s. harms for themselves,
science, and society. Analysis revealed a statistically significant rise in
GenAI adoption rates from 2023 to 2024. Students predominantly leverage GenAI
tools to deepen understanding, enhance work quality, and stay informed about
emerging technologies. Although most students assess their own usage of GenAI as
ethical and beneficial, they nonetheless expressed significant concerns
regarding GenAI and its impacts on society. We collected student estimates of
``P(doom)'' and discovered a bimodal distribution. Thus, we show that the
student body at Mines is polarized with respect to future impacts of GenAI on
the engineering workforce and society, despite being increasingly willing to
explore GenAI over time. We discuss implications of these findings for future
research and for integrating GenAI in engineering education.
