Title: From Voice to Safety: Language AI Powered Pilot-ATC Communication
Understanding for Airport Surface Movement Collision Risk Assessment
Authors: Yutian Pang, Andrew Paul Kendall, Alex Porcayo, Mariah Barsotti,
Anahita Jain, John-Paul Clarke
ID: 2503.04974
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.04974

Abstract:
This work provides a feasible solution to the existing airport surface safety
monitoring capabilities (i.e., Airport Surface Surveillance Capability (ASSC)),
namely language AI-based voice communication understanding for collision risk
assessment. The proposed framework consists of two major parts, (a) rule-
enhanced Named Entity Recognition (NER); (b) surface collision risk modeling.
NER module generates information tables by processing voice communication
transcripts, which serve as references for producing potential taxi plans and
calculating the surface movement collision risk. We first collect and annotate
our dataset based on open-sourced video recordings and safety investigation
reports. Additionally, we refer to FAA Order JO 7110.65W and FAA Order JO
7340.2N to get the list of heuristic rules and phase contractions of
communication between the pilot and the Air Traffic Controller (ATCo). Then, we
propose the novel ATC Rule-Enhanced NER method, which integrates the heuristic
rules into the model training and inference stages, resulting in a hybrid rule-
based NER model. We show the effectiveness of this hybrid approach by comparing
different setups with different token-level embedding models. For the risk
modeling, we adopt the node-link airport layout graph from NASA FACET and model
the aircraft taxi speed at each link as a log-normal distribution and derive the
total taxi time distribution. Then, we propose a spatiotemporal formulation of
the risk probability of two aircraft moving across potential collision nodes
during ground movement. Furthermore, we propose the real-time implementation of
such a method to obtain the lead time, with a comparison with a Petri-Net based
method.
