Title: Focusing Robot Open-Ended Reinforcement Learning Through Users' Purposes
Authors: Emilio Cartoni, Gianluca Cioccolini, Gianluca Baldassarre
ID: 2503.12579
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.12579

Abstract:
Open-Ended Learning (OEL) autonomous robots can acquire new skills and knowledge
through direct interaction with their environment, relying on mechanisms such as
intrinsic motivations and self-generated goals to guide learning processes. OEL
robots are highly relevant for applications as they can autonomously leverage
acquired knowledge to perform tasks beneficial to human users in unstructured
environments, addressing challenges unforeseen at design time. However, OEL
robots face a significant limitation: their openness may lead them to waste time
learning information that is irrelevant to tasks desired by specific users.
Here, we propose a solution called `Purpose-Directed Open-Ended Learning'
(POEL), based on the novel concept of `purpose' introduced in previous work. A
purpose specifies what users want the robot to achieve. The key insight of this
work is that purpose can focus OEL on learning self-generated classes of tasks
that, while unknown during autonomous learning (as typical in OEL), involve
objects relevant to the purpose. This concept is operationalised in a novel
robot architecture capable of receiving a human purpose through speech-to-text,
analysing the scene to identify objects, and using a Large Language Model to
reason about which objects are purpose-relevant. These objects are then used to
bias OEL exploration towards their spatial proximity and to self-generate
rewards that favour interactions with them. The solution is tested in a
simulated scenario where a camera-arm-gripper robot interacts freely with
purpose-related and distractor objects. For the first time, the results
demonstrate the potential advantages of purpose-focused OEL over state-of-the-
art OEL methods, enabling robots to handle unstructured environments while
steering their learning toward knowledge acquisition relevant to users.
