Title: REMAC: Self-Reflective and Self-Evolving Multi-Agent Collaboration for
Long-Horizon Robot Manipulation
Authors: Puzhen Yuan, Angyuan Ma, Yunchao Yao, Huaxiu Yao, Masayoshi Tomizuka,
Mingyu Ding
ID: 2503.22122
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.22122

Abstract:
Vision-language models (VLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in
robotic planning, particularly for long-horizon tasks that require a holistic
understanding of the environment for task decomposition. Existing methods
typically rely on prior environmental knowledge or carefully designed task-
specific prompts, making them struggle with dynamic scene changes or unexpected
task conditions, e.g., a robot attempting to put a carrot in the microwave but
finds the door was closed. Such challenges underscore two critical issues:
adaptability and efficiency. To address them, in this work, we propose an
adaptive multi-agent planning framework, termed REMAC, that enables efficient,
scene-agnostic multi-robot long-horizon task planning and execution through
continuous reflection and self-evolution. REMAC incorporates two key modules: a
self-reflection module performing pre-condition and post-condition checks in the
loop to evaluate progress and refine plans, and a self-evolvement module
dynamically adapting plans based on scene-specific reasoning. It offers several
appealing benefits: 1) Robots can initially explore and reason about the
environment without complex prompt design. 2) Robots can keep reflecting on
potential planning errors and adapting the plan based on task-specific insights.
3) After iterations, a robot can call another one to coordinate tasks in
parallel, maximizing the task execution efficiency. To validate REMAC's
effectiveness, we build a multi-agent environment for long-horizon robot
manipulation and navigation based on RoboCasa, featuring 4 task categories with
27 task styles and 50+ different objects. Based on it, we further benchmark
state-of-the-art reasoning models, including DeepSeek-R1, o3-mini, QwQ, and
Grok3, demonstrating REMAC's superiority by boosting average success rates by
40% and execution efficiency by 52.7% over the single robot baseline.
