Title: On the Need to Rethink Trust in AI Assistants for Software Development: A
Critical Review
Authors: Sebastian Baltes, Timo Speith, Brenda Chiteri, Seyedmoein
Mohsenimofidi, Shalini Chakraborty, Daniel Buschek
ID: 2504.12461
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.12461

Abstract:
Trust is a fundamental concept in human decision-making and collaboration that
has long been studied in philosophy and psychology. However, software
engineering (SE) articles often use the term trust informally; providing an
explicit definition or embedding results in established trust models is rare. In
SE research on AI assistants, this practice culminates in equating trust with
the likelihood of accepting generated content, which, in isolation, does not
capture the full conceptual complexity of trust. Without a common definition,
true secondary research on trust is impossible. The objectives of our research
were: (1) to present the psychological and philosophical foundations of human
trust, (2) to systematically study how trust is conceptualized in SE and the
related disciplines human-computer interaction and information systems, and (3)
to discuss limitations of equating trust with content acceptance, outlining how
SE research can adopt existing trust models to overcome the widespread informal
use of the term trust. We conducted a literature review across disciplines and a
critical review of recent SE articles with a focus on trust conceptualizations.
We found that trust is rarely defined or conceptualized in SE articles. Related
disciplines commonly embed their methodology and results in established trust
models, clearly distinguishing, for example, between initial trust and trust
formation and between appropriate and inappropriate trust. On a meta-scientific
level, other disciplines even discuss whether and when trust can be applied to
AI assistants at all. Our study reveals a significant maturity gap of trust
research in SE compared to other disciplines. We provide concrete
recommendations on how SE researchers can adopt established trust models and
instruments to study trust in AI assistants beyond the acceptance of generated
software artifacts.
