Title: Transforming Future Data Center Operations and Management via Physical AI
Authors: Zhiwei Cao, Minghao Li, Feng Lin, Jimin Jia, Yonggang Wen, Jianxiong
Yin, Simon See
ID: 2504.04982
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.04982

Abstract:
Data centers (DCs) as mission-critical infrastructures are pivotal in powering
the growth of artificial intelligence (AI) and the digital economy. The
evolution from Internet DC to AI DC has introduced new challenges in operating
and managing data centers for improved business resilience and reduced total
cost of ownership. As a result, new paradigms, beyond the traditional approaches
based on best practices, must be in order for future data centers. In this
research, we propose and develop a novel Physical AI (PhyAI) framework for
advancing DC operations and management. Our system leverages the emerging
capabilities of state-of-the-art industrial products and our in-house research
and development. Specifically, it presents three core modules, namely: 1) an
industry-grade in-house simulation engine to simulate DC operations in a highly
accurate manner, 2) an AI engine built upon NVIDIA PhysicsNemo for the training
and evaluation of physics-informed machine learning (PIML) models, and 3) a
digital twin platform built upon NVIDIA Omniverse for our proposed 5-tier
digital twin framework. This system presents a scalable and adaptable solution
to digitalize, optimize, and automate future data center operations and
management, by enabling real-time digital twins for future data centers. To
illustrate its effectiveness, we present a compelling case study on building a
surrogate model for predicting the thermal and airflow profiles of a large-scale
DC in a real-time manner. Our results demonstrate its superior performance over
traditional time-consuming Computational Fluid Dynamics/Heat Transfer (CFD/HT)
simulation, with a median absolute temperature prediction error of 0.18 °C. This
emerging approach would open doors to several potential research directions for
advancing Physical AI in future DC operations.
