Title: TwinArch: A Digital Twin Reference Architecture
Authors: Alessandra Somma, Domenico Amalfitano, Alessandra De Benedictis,
Patrizio Pelliccione
ID: 2504.07530
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.07530

Abstract:
Background. Digital Twins (DTs) are dynamic virtual representations of physical
systems, enabled by seamless, bidirectional communication between the physical
and digital realms. Among the challenges impeding the widespread adoption of DTs
is the absence of a universally accepted definition and a standardized DT
Reference Architecture (RA). Existing state-of-the-art architectures remain
largely domain-specific, primarily emphasizing aspects like modeling and
simulation. Furthermore, they often combine structural and dynamic elements into
unified, all-in-one diagrams, which adds to the ambiguity and confusion
surrounding the concept of Digital Twins.
  Objective. To address these challenges, this work aims to contribute a domain-
independent, multi-view Digital Twin Reference Architecture that can help
practitioners in architecting and engineering their DTs.
  Method. We adopted the design science methodology, structured into three
cycles: (i) an initial investigation conducting a Systematic Literature Review
to identify key architectural elements, (ii) preliminary design refined via
feedback from practitioners, and (iii) final artifact development, integrating
knowledge from widely adopted DT development platforms and validated through an
expert survey of 20 participants.
  Results. The proposed Digital Twin Reference Architecture is named TwinArch.
It is documented using the Views and Beyond methodology by the Software
Engineering Institute. TwinArch website and replication package:
https://alessandrasomma28.github.io/twinarch/
  Conclusion. TwinArch offers practitioners practical artifacts that can be
utilized for designing and developing new DT systems across various domains. It
enables customization and tailoring to specific use cases while also supporting
the documentation of existing DT systems.
