Title: $Π$-NeSy: A Possibilistic Neuro-Symbolic Approach
Authors: Ismaïl Baaj, Pierre Marquis
ID: 2504.07055
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.07055

Abstract:
In this article, we introduce a neuro-symbolic approach that combines a low-
level perception task performed by a neural network with a high-level reasoning
task performed by a possibilistic rule-based system. The goal is to be able to
derive for each input instance the degree of possibility that it belongs to a
target (meta-)concept. This (meta-)concept is connected to intermediate concepts
by a possibilistic rule-based system. The probability of each intermediate
concept for the input instance is inferred using a neural network. The
connection between the low-level perception task and the high-level reasoning
task lies in the transformation of neural network outputs modeled by probability
distributions (through softmax activation) into possibility distributions. The
use of intermediate concepts is valuable for the explanation purpose: using the
rule-based system, the classification of an input instance as an element of the
(meta-)concept can be justified by the fact that intermediate concepts have been
recognized.
  From the technical side, our contribution consists of the design of efficient
methods for defining the matrix relation and the equation system associated with
a possibilistic rule-based system. The corresponding matrix and equation are key
data structures used to perform inferences from a possibilistic rule-based
system and to learn the values of the rule parameters in such a system according
to a training data sample. Furthermore, leveraging recent results on the
handling of inconsistent systems of fuzzy relational equations, an approach for
learning rule parameters according to multiple training data samples is
presented. Experiments carried out on the MNIST addition problems and the MNIST
Sudoku puzzles problems highlight the effectiveness of our approach compared
with state-of-the-art neuro-symbolic ones.
