Title: Accelerating Causal Network Discovery of Alzheimer Disease Biomarkers via
Scientific Literature-based Retrieval Augmented Generation
Authors: Xiaofan Zhou, Liangjie Huang, Pinyang Cheng, Wenpen Yin, Rui Zhang,
Wenrui Hao, Lu Cheng
ID: 2504.08768
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.08768

Abstract:
The causal relationships between biomarkers are essential for disease diagnosis
and medical treatment planning. One notable application is Alzheimer's disease
(AD) diagnosis, where certain biomarkers may influence the presence of others,
enabling early detection, precise disease staging, targeted treatments, and
improved monitoring of disease progression. However, understanding these causal
relationships is complex and requires extensive research. Constructing a
comprehensive causal network of biomarkers demands significant effort from human
experts, who must analyze a vast number of research papers, and have bias in
understanding diseases' biomarkers and their relation. This raises an important
question: Can advanced large language models (LLMs), such as those utilizing
retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), assist in building causal networks of
biomarkers for further medical analysis? To explore this, we collected 200 AD-
related research papers published over the past 25 years and then integrated
scientific literature with RAG to extract AD biomarkers and generate causal
relations among them. Given the high-risk nature of the medical diagnosis, we
applied uncertainty estimation to assess the reliability of the generated causal
edges and examined the faithfulness and scientificness of LLM reasoning using
both automatic and human evaluation. We find that RAG enhances the ability of
LLMs to generate more accurate causal networks from scientific papers. However,
the overall performance of LLMs in identifying causal relations of AD biomarkers
is still limited. We hope this study will inspire further foundational research
on AI-driven analysis of AD biomarkers causal network discovery.
