Title: Human strategies for correcting `human-robot' errors during a laundry
sorting task
Authors: Pepita Barnard, Maria J Galvez Trigo, Dominic Price, Sue Cobb, Gisela
Reyes-Cruz, Gustavo Berumen, David Branson, Mojtaba A. Khanesar, Mercedes Torres
Torres, Michel Valstar
ID: 2504.08395
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.08395

Abstract:
Mental models and expectations underlying human-human interaction (HHI) inform
human-robot interaction (HRI) with domestic robots. To ease collaborative home
tasks by improving domestic robot speech and behaviours for human-robot
communication, we designed a study to understand how people communicated when
failure occurs. To identify patterns of natural communication, particularly in
response to robotic failures, participants instructed Laundrobot to move laundry
into baskets using natural language and gestures. Laundrobot either worked
error-free, or in one of two error modes. Participants were not advised
Laundrobot would be a human actor, nor given information about error modes.
Video analysis from 42 participants found speech patterns, included laughter,
verbal expressions, and filler words, such as ``oh'' and ``ok'', also, sequences
of body movements, including touching one's own face, increased pointing with a
static finger, and expressions of surprise. Common strategies deployed when
errors occurred, included correcting and teaching, taking responsibility, and
displays of frustration. The strength of reaction to errors diminished with
exposure, possibly indicating acceptance or resignation. Some used strategies
similar to those used to communicate with other technologies, such as smart
assistants. An anthropomorphic robot may not be ideally suited to this kind of
task. Laundrobot's appearance, morphology, voice, capabilities, and recovery
strategies may have impacted how it was perceived. Some participants indicated
Laundrobot's actual skills were not aligned with expectations; this made it
difficult to know what to expect and how much Laundrobot understood. Expertise,
personality, and cultural differences may affect responses, however these were
not assessed.
