Title: Predicting Halo Formation Time Using Machine Learning
Authors: Atulit Srivastava, Weiguang Cui, Daniel de Andres, Jesse B. Golden-
Marx, Elena Rasia, Ying Zu
ID: 2504.14426
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.14426

Abstract:
Context:Halo formation time, which quantifies the mass assembly history of dark-
matter halos, directly impacts galaxy properties and evolution. Although not
directly observable, it can be inferred through proxies like star formation
history or galaxy spatial distributions. Recent advances in machine learning
enable more accurate predictions of halo formation time using galaxy and halo
properties.
  Aims:This study aims to investigate a machine learning-based approach to
predict halo formation time-defined as the epoch when a halo accretes half of
its current mass-using both halo and baryonic properties derived from
cosmological simulations. By incorporating properties associated with the
brightest cluster galaxy located at the cluster center, its associated
intracluster light component and satellite galaxies, we aim to surpass these
analytical predictions, improve prediction accuracy and identify key properties
that can provide the best proxy for the halo assembly history.
  Methods:Using The Three Hundred cosmological simulations, we train Random
Forest (RF) and Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) models on halo and baryonic
properties, such as mass, concentration, stellar and gas masses, and features of
the brightest cluster galaxy and intracluster light. CNN models are trained on
two-dimensional radial property maps. We also construct simple linear models
using only observationally accessible features. Results:RF models show median
biases of 4%-9% with standard deviations of 20%. CNN models reduce median bias
to <4%, although they have higher scatter. Simple linear models using a limited
number of observables achieve prediction accuracy comparable to RF models.
Traditional relations between halo formation time and mass/concentration are
preserved.
