Title: Nuclear Microreactor Control with Deep Reinforcement Learning
Authors: Leo Tunkle, Kamal Abdulraheem, Linyu Lin, Majdi I. Radaideh
ID: 2504.00156
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.00156

Abstract:
The economic feasibility of nuclear microreactors will depend on minimizing
operating costs through advancements in autonomous control, especially when
these microreactors are operating alongside other types of energy systems (e.g.,
renewable energy). This study explores the application of deep reinforcement
learning (RL) for real-time drum control in microreactors, exploring performance
in regard to load-following scenarios. By leveraging a point kinetics model with
thermal and xenon feedback, we first establish a baseline using a single-output
RL agent, then compare it against a traditional proportional-integral-derivative
(PID) controller. This study demonstrates that RL controllers, including both
single- and multi-agent RL (MARL) frameworks, can achieve similar or even
superior load-following performance as traditional PID control across a range of
load-following scenarios. In short transients, the RL agent was able to reduce
the tracking error rate in comparison to PID. Over extended 300-minute load-
following scenarios in which xenon feedback becomes a dominant factor, PID
maintained better accuracy, but RL still remained within a 1% error margin
despite being trained only on short-duration scenarios. This highlights RL's
strong ability to generalize and extrapolate to longer, more complex transients,
affording substantial reductions in training costs and reduced overfitting.
Furthermore, when control was extended to multiple drums, MARL enabled
independent drum control as well as maintained reactor symmetry constraints
without sacrificing performance -- an objective that standard single-agent RL
could not learn. We also found that, as increasing levels of Gaussian noise were
added to the power measurements, the RL controllers were able to maintain lower
error rates than PID, and to do so with less control effort.
