Title: Real-is-Sim: Bridging the Sim-to-Real Gap with a Dynamic Digital Twin
Authors: Jad Abou-Chakra, Lingfeng Sun, Krishan Rana, Brandon May, Karl
Schmeckpeper, Niko Suenderhauf, Maria Vittoria Minniti, Laura Herlant
ID: 2504.03597
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03597

Abstract:
We introduce real-is-sim, a new approach to integrating simulation into behavior
cloning pipelines. In contrast to real-only methods, which lack the ability to
safely test policies before deployment, and sim-to-real methods, which require
complex adaptation to cross the sim-to-real gap, our framework allows policies
to seamlessly switch between running on real hardware and running in
parallelized virtual environments. At the center of real-is-sim is a dynamic
digital twin, powered by the Embodied Gaussian simulator, that synchronizes with
the real world at 60Hz. This twin acts as a mediator between the behavior
cloning policy and the real robot. Policies are trained using representations
derived from simulator states and always act on the simulated robot, never the
real one. During deployment, the real robot simply follows the simulated robot's
joint states, and the simulation is continuously corrected with real world
measurements. This setup, where the simulator drives all policy execution and
maintains real-time synchronization with the physical world, shifts the
responsibility of crossing the sim-to-real gap to the digital twin's
synchronization mechanisms, instead of the policy itself. We demonstrate real-
is-sim on a long-horizon manipulation task (PushT), showing that virtual
evaluations are consistent with real-world results. We further show how real-
world data can be augmented with virtual rollouts and compare to policies
trained on different representations derived from the simulator state including
object poses and rendered images from both static and robot-mounted cameras. Our
results highlight the flexibility of the real-is-sim framework across training,
evaluation, and deployment stages. Videos available at https://real-is-
sim.github.io.
