Title: Towards prediction of morphological heart age from computed tomography
angiography
Authors: Johan Öfverstedt, Elin Lundström, Håkan Ahlström, Joel Kullberg
ID: 2504.15783
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.15783

Abstract:
Age prediction from medical images or other health-related non-imaging data is
an important approach to data-driven aging research, providing knowledge of how
much information a specific tissue or organ carries about the chronological age
of the individual. In this work, we studied the prediction of age from computed
tomography angiography (CTA) images, which provide detailed representations of
the heart morphology, with the goals of (i) studying the relationship between
morphology and aging, and (ii) developing a novel \emph{morphological heart age}
biomarker. We applied an image registration-based method that standardizes the
images from the whole cohort into a single space. We then extracted supervoxels
(using unsupervised segmentation), and corresponding robust features of density
and local volume, which provide a detailed representation of the heart
morphology while being robust to registration errors. Machine learning models
are then trained to fit regression models from these features to the
chronological age. We applied the method to a subset of the images from the
Swedish CArdioPulomonary bioImage Study (SCAPIS) dataset, consisting of 721
females and 666 males. We observe a mean absolute error of $2.74$ years for
females and $2.77$ years for males. The predictions from different sub-regions
of interest were observed to be more highly correlated with the predictions from
the whole heart, compared to the chronological age, revealing a high consistency
in the predictions from morphology. Saliency analysis was also performed on the
prediction models to study what regions are associated positively and negatively
with the predicted age. This resulted in detailed association maps where the
density and volume of known, as well as some novel sub-regions of interest, are
determined to be important. The saliency analysis aids in the interpretability
of the models and their predictions.
