Title: From expNN to sinNN: automatic generation of sum-of-products models for
potential energy surfaces in internal coordinates using neural networks and
sparse grid sampling
Authors: Antoine Aerts
ID: 2504.21381
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21381

Abstract:
Potential Energy Surfaces are generally required for simulating quantum
dynamics. Specifically, having an analytical expression of the PES enables a
more efficient dynamics workflow compared to the currently popular direct
dynamics approaches. When using the MCTDH method, there is also a strong
advantage to express the PES in sum-of-products form for solving the time-
dependent nuclear Schrödinger equation. Nevertheless, obtaining an accurate
expression for the PES of molecular systems that contain more than a few atoms
presents challenges. The objectives of this work are twofold. First, the
practicality of a single-layer artificial neural network with sinusoidal
activation functions for representing potential energy surfaces in sum-of-
products form will be evaluated. Second, the efficiency and ability of a
homogeneous sampling strategy based on sparse grids to provide unbiased coverage
of configuration space for generating training data will be assessed. The
fitting approach, named sinNN, is applied to modeling the PES of HONO, covering
both the trans and cis isomers. Refitting is first explored with comparison to
the expNN fitting method. Second, fitting from potential energies obtained from
the machine learning model MLatom/AIQM2 is considered. The sinNN PES model
obtained from MLatom/AIQM2 energies was able to reproduce available experimental
fundamental vibrational transition energies with a root mean square error of
about 17 cm-1. sinNN combined with sparse grids sampling approach proves to be
of practical use for the chosen system, both at refitting and direct fitting
tasks. The ability of MLatom/AIQM models to accurately reproduce global PESs
beyond equilibrium geometries is of particular interest.
