Title: Community need for an Astrobiology Sample Repository and Sample Reference
Suite
Authors: A. Pontefract, C. Bradburne, K. Craft, M. Ballarotto, K. Bowden, R.
Klima, S. MacKenzie, J. Núñez, E. G. Rivera-Valentín, C. E. Carr, L. Chou, A.
Davila, J. L. Eigenbrode, C. R. German, H. V. Graham, S. S. Johnson, T. M.
Hoehler, A. E. Murray, M. Neveu, B. L. Nunn, H. M. Sapers, S. Shkolyar, 1A.
Steele, M. G. Trainer
ID: 2504.03813
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03813

Abstract:
As we prepare for the next planetary mission charged with finding life beyond
Earth, the Astrobiology community must continue to improve its understanding of
what constitutes a biosignature, through the use of planetary analog samples.
The study of these collected and generated samples is expanding our knowledge of
what constitutes habitable environments, what life is capable of, and
importantly, how to make biosignature detections within compositionally complex
samples - aiding in the development of life detection instrumentation. And yet
the full potential of these samples remains untapped. While the Astrobiology
community possesses an incredible inventory of planetary analog samples, some
incredibly precious, these are scattered across the country in individual
freezers with varying degrees of documentation, curation practices, and
contamination control. We, as a community, need to change the status quo of how
we approach planetary analog research. One of the biggest actions we could take
over the next 10 years to change that paradigm would be the creation of a sample
repository for Astrobiology relevant materials, providing a centralized, well-
curated, wealth of precious samples for the community. Such a collection would
create a framework for material and meta-data submission that minimizes burden
on the individual PIs, satisfying open data requirements; it would facilitate
biosignature research, and aid in the creation of a robust life detection
framework; support the development of a standardized sample reference suite for
life detection instrumentation; and finally, aid in the development of
techniques to be used for future sample return endeavors.
