Title: Large-scale artificial intelligence with 41 million nanophotonic neurons
on a metasurface
Authors: Mingcheng Luo, Meirui Jiang, Bhavin J. Shastri, Nansen Zhou, Wenfei
Guo, Jianmin Xiong, Dongliang Wang, Renjie Zhou, Chester Shu, Qi Dou, Chaoran
Huang
ID: 2504.20416
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20416

Abstract:
Conventional integrated circuits (ICs) struggle to meet the escalating demands
of artificial intelligence (AI). This has sparked a renewed interest in an
unconventional computing paradigm: neuromorphic (brain-inspired) computing.
However, current neuromorphic systems face significant challenges in delivering
a large number of parameters (i.e., weights) required for large-scale AI models.
As a result, most neuromorphic hardware is limited to basic benchmark
demonstrations, hindering its application to real-world AI challenges. Here, we
present a large-scale optical neural network (ONN) for machine learning
acceleration, featuring over 41 million photonic neurons. This system not only
surpasses digital electronics in speed and energy efficiency but more
importantly, closes the performance gap with large-scale AI models. Our ONN
leverages an innovative optical metasurface device featuring numerous spatial
modes. This device integrates over 41 million meta-atoms on a 10 mm$^2$
metasurface chip, enabling the processing of tens of millions of weights in a
single operation. For the first time, we demonstrate that an ONN, utilizing a
single-layer metasurface, can match the performance of deep and large-scale deep
learning models, such as ResNet and Vision Transformer, across various benchmark
tasks. Additionally, we show that our system can deliver high-performance
solutions to real-world AI challenges through its unprecedented scale, such as
accelerating the analysis of multi-gigapixel whole slide images (WSIs) for
cancer detection by processing the million-pixel sub-image in a single shot. Our
system reduces computing time and energy consumption by over 1,000 times
compared to state-of-the-art graphic processing units (GPUs). This work presents
a large-scale, low-power, and high-performance neuromorphic computing system,
paving the way for future disruptive AI technologies.
