Title: Robin: A multi-agent system for automating scientific discovery
Authors: Ali Essam Ghareeb, Benjamin Chang, Ludovico Mitchener, Angela Yiu,
Caralyn J. Szostkiewicz, Jon M. Laurent, Muhammed T. Razzak, Andrew D. White,
Michaela M. Hinks, Samuel G. Rodriques
ID: 2505.13400
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.13400

Abstract:
Scientific discovery is driven by the iterative process of background research,
hypothesis generation, experimentation, and data analysis. Despite recent
advancements in applying artificial intelligence to scientific discovery, no
system has yet automated all of these stages in a single workflow. Here, we
introduce Robin, the first multi-agent system capable of fully automating the
key intellectual steps of the scientific process. By integrating literature
search agents with data analysis agents, Robin can generate hypotheses, propose
experiments, interpret experimental results, and generate updated hypotheses,
achieving a semi-autonomous approach to scientific discovery. By applying this
system, we were able to identify a novel treatment for dry age-related macular
degeneration (dAMD), the major cause of blindness in the developed world. Robin
proposed enhancing retinal pigment epithelium phagocytosis as a therapeutic
strategy, and identified and validated a promising therapeutic candidate,
ripasudil. Ripasudil is a clinically-used rho kinase (ROCK) inhibitor that has
never previously been proposed for treating dAMD. To elucidate the mechanism of
ripasudil-induced upregulation of phagocytosis, Robin then proposed and analyzed
a follow-up RNA-seq experiment, which revealed upregulation of ABCA1, a critical
lipid efflux pump and possible novel target. All hypotheses, experimental plans,
data analyses, and data figures in the main text of this report were produced by
Robin. As the first AI system to autonomously discover and validate a novel
therapeutic candidate within an iterative lab-in-the-loop framework, Robin
establishes a new paradigm for AI-driven scientific discovery.
