Title: Chemical classification program synthesis using generative artificial
intelligence
Authors: Christopher J. Mungall, Adnan Malik, Daniel R. Korn, Justin T. Reese,
Noel M. O'Boyle,  Noel, Janna Hastings
ID: 2505.18470
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.18470

Abstract:
Accurately classifying chemical structures is essential for cheminformatics and
bioinformatics, including tasks such as identifying bioactive compounds of
interest, screening molecules for toxicity to humans, finding non-organic
compounds with desirable material properties, or organizing large chemical
libraries for drug discovery or environmental monitoring. However, manual
classification is labor-intensive and difficult to scale to large chemical
databases. Existing automated approaches either rely on manually constructed
classification rules, or are deep learning methods that lack explainability.
  This work presents an approach that uses generative artificial intelligence to
automatically write chemical classifier programs for classes in the Chemical
Entities of Biological Interest (ChEBI) database. These programs can be used for
efficient deterministic run-time classification of SMILES structures, with
natural language explanations. The programs themselves constitute an explainable
computable ontological model of chemical class nomenclature, which we call the
ChEBI Chemical Class Program Ontology (C3PO).
  We validated our approach against the ChEBI database, and compared our results
against deep learning models and a naive SMARTS pattern based classifier. C3PO
outperforms the naive classifier, but does not reach the performance of state of
the art deep learning methods. However, C3PO has a number of strengths that
complement deep learning methods, including explainability and reduced data
dependence. C3PO can be used alongside deep learning classifiers to provide an
explanation of the classification, where both methods agree. The programs can be
used as part of the ontology development process, and iteratively refined by
expert human curators.
