Title: Real-Time Brain-Computer Interface Control of Walking Exoskeleton with
Bilateral Sensory Feedback
Authors: Jeffrey Lim, Po T. Wang, Won Joon Sohn, Derrick Lin, Shravan Thaploo,
Luke Bashford, David Bjanes, Angelica Nguyen, Hui Gong, Michelle Armacost, Susan
J. Shaw, Spencer Kellis, Brian Lee, Darrin Lee, Payam Heydari, Richard A.
Andersen, Zoran Nenadic, Charles Y. Liu, An H. Do
ID: 2505.00219
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00219

Abstract:
Invasive brain-computer interface (BCI) technology has demonstrated the
possibility of restoring brain-controlled walking in paraplegic spinal cord
injury patients. However, current implementations of BCI-controlled walking
still have significant drawbacks. In particular, prior systems are
unidirectional and lack sensory feedback for insensate patients, have suboptimal
reliance on brain signals from the bilateral arm areas of the motor cortex, and
depend on external systems for signal processing. Motivated by these
shortcomings, this study is the first time a bidirectional brain-computer
interface (BDBCI) has demonstrated the restoration of both brain-controlled
walking and leg sensory feedback while utilizing the bilateral leg motor and
sensory cortices. Here, a subject undergoing subdural electrocorticogram
electrode implantation for epilepsy surgery evaluation leveraged the leg
representation areas of the bilateral interhemispheric primary motor and sensory
cortices to operate a BDBCI with high performance. Although electrode
implantation in the interhemispheric region is uncommon, electrodes can be
safely implanted in this region to access rich leg motor information and deliver
bilateral leg sensory feedback. Finally, we demonstrated that all BDBCI
operations can be executed on a dedicated, portable embedded system. These
results indicate that BDBCIs can potentially provide brain-controlled ambulation
and artificial leg sensation to people with paraplegia after spinal cord injury
in a manner that emulates full-implantability and is untethered from any
external systems.
