Title: Are Large Language Models Reliable AI Scientists? Assessing Reverse-
Engineering of Black-Box Systems
Authors: Jiayi Geng, Howard Chen, Dilip Arumugam, Thomas L. Griffiths
ID: 2505.17968
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.17968

Abstract:
Using AI to create autonomous researchers has the potential to accelerate
scientific discovery. A prerequisite for this vision is understanding how well
an AI model can identify the underlying structure of a black-box system from its
behavior. In this paper, we explore how well a large language model (LLM) learns
to identify a black-box function from passively observed versus actively
collected data. We investigate the reverse-engineering capabilities of LLMs
across three distinct types of black-box systems, each chosen to represent
different problem domains where future autonomous AI researchers may have
considerable impact: Program, Formal Language, and Math Equation. Through
extensive experiments, we show that LLMs fail to extract information from
observations, reaching a performance plateau that falls short of the ideal of
Bayesian inference. However, we demonstrate that prompting LLMs to not only
observe but also intervene -- actively querying the black-box with specific
inputs to observe the resulting output -- improves performance by allowing LLMs
to test edge cases and refine their beliefs. By providing the intervention data
from one LLM to another, we show that this improvement is partly a result of
engaging in the process of generating effective interventions, paralleling
results in the literature on human learning. Further analysis reveals that
engaging in intervention can help LLMs escape from two common failure modes:
overcomplication, where the LLM falsely assumes prior knowledge about the black-
box, and overlooking, where the LLM fails to incorporate observations. These
insights provide practical guidance for helping LLMs more effectively reverse-
engineer black-box systems, supporting their use in making new discoveries.
