Title: H2R: A Human-to-Robot Data Augmentation for Robot Pre-training from
Videos
Authors: Guangrun Li, Yaoxu Lyu, Zhuoyang Liu, Chengkai Hou, Jieyu Zhang,
Shanghang Zhang
ID: 2505.11920
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.11920

Abstract:
Large-scale pre-training using egocentric human videos has proven effective for
robot learning. However, the models pre-trained on such data can be suboptimal
for robot learning due to the significant visual gap between human hands and
those of different robots. To remedy this, we propose H2R, a human-to-robot data
augmentation pipeline that converts egocentric human videos into robot-centric
visual data. H2R estimates human hand pose from videos, retargets the motion to
simulated robotic arms, removes human limbs via segmentation and inpainting, and
composites rendered robot embodiments into the original frames with camera-
aligned geometry. This process explicitly bridges the visual gap between human
and robot embodiments during pre-training. We apply H2R to augment large-scale
egocentric human video datasets such as Ego4D and SSv2. To verify the
effectiveness of the augmentation pipeline, we introduce a CLIP-based image-text
similarity metric that quantitatively evaluates the semantic fidelity of robot-
rendered frames to the original human actions. We evaluate H2R through
comprehensive experiments in both simulation and real-world settings. In
simulation, H2R consistently improves downstream success rates across four
benchmark suites-Robomimic, RLBench, PushT, and CortexBench-yielding gains of
1.3%-10.2% across different visual encoders and policy learning methods. In
real-world experiments, H2R improves performance on UR5 and dual-arm Franka/UR5
manipulation platforms, achieving 3.3%-23.3% success rate gains across gripper-
based, dexterous, and bimanual tasks. We further demonstrate the potential of
H2R in cross-embodiment generalization and its compatibility with vision-
language-action models. These results indicate that H2R improves the
generalization ability of robotic policies by mitigating the visual
discrepancies between human and robot domains.
