Title: Holographic entanglement entropy and complexity for the cosmological
braneworld model
Authors: Souvik Paul, Gopinath Guin, Sunandan Gangopadhyay
ID: 2505.11553
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.11553

Abstract:
In a recent study \cite{Park:2020jio}, the time-dependent entanglement entropy
of the universe undergoing expansion according to various power laws has been
analyzed within the framework of the braneworld model. The results of the
entanglement entropy in that paper take into account only the effects of a
radiation and a matter-dominated universe. In this work, we have computed the
time-dependent entanglement entropy and complexity of the FLRW universe in the
presence of different matter sources (radiation, matter and some exotic matter).
In contrast to the approach in \cite{Park:2020jio}, all the calculations in this
paper have been carried out in a perturbative manner in the framework of
braneworld model of cosmology. According to this model, our universe is situated
on a brane and different matter sources appear on the brane due to the back
reaction of different $p$-brane gas configurations in the bulk spacetime. By
considering the bulk spacetime as a black brane geometry, we have considered
different blackening factors corresponding to radiation, matter, and exotic
matter and calculated entanglement entropy and complexity holographically. In
the braneworld model, the universe's expansion is described by the brane's time-
dependent radial position. This position is determined using the second Israel
junction condition for various matter sources. The time evolution of
entanglement entropy and complexity is then obtained by substituting this brane
position. We have also shown the dependence of entanglement entropy and
complexity on the cosmological time for all the different matter-dominated
universes in the early and late time eras. Even though the calculations of
holographic entanglement entropy and complexity are done perturbatively, the
results remain consistent with those of \cite{Park:2020jio}.
