Title: The Precautionary Principle and the Innovation Principle: Incompatible
Guides for AI Innovation Governance?
Authors: Kim Kaivanto
ID: 2505.02846
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.02846

Abstract:
In policy debates concerning the governance and regulation of Artificial
Intelligence (AI), both the Precautionary Principle (PP) and the Innovation
Principle (IP) are advocated by their respective interest groups. Do these
principles offer wholly incompatible and contradictory guidance? Does one
necessarily negate the other? I argue here that provided attention is restricted
to weak-form PP and IP, the answer to both of these questions is "No." The
essence of these weak formulations is the requirement to fully account for
type-I error costs arising from erroneously preventing the innovation's
diffusion through society (i.e. mistaken regulatory red-lighting) as well as the
type-II error costs arising from erroneously allowing the innovation to diffuse
through society (i.e. mistaken regulatory green-lighting). Within the Signal
Detection Theory (SDT) model developed here, weak-PP red-light (weak-IP green-
light) determinations are optimal for sufficiently small (large) ratios of
expected type-I to type-II error costs. For intermediate expected cost ratios,
an amber-light 'wait-and-monitor' policy is optimal. Regulatory sandbox
instruments allow AI testing and experimentation to take place within a
structured environment of limited duration and societal scale, whereby the
expected cost ratio falls within the 'wait-and-monitor' range. Through
sandboxing regulators and innovating firms learn more about the expected cost
ratio, and what respective adaptations -- of regulation, of technical solution,
of business model, or combination thereof, if any -- are needed to keep the
ratio out of the weak-PP red-light zone. Nevertheless AI foundation models are
ill-suited for regulatory sandboxing as their general-purpose nature precludes
credible identification of misclassification costs.
