Title: Understanding molecular ratios in the carbon and oxygen poor outer Milky
Way with interpretable machine learning
Authors: Gijs Vermariën, Serena Viti, Johannes Heyl, Francesco Fontani
ID: 2505.08410
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.08410

Abstract:
Context. The outer Milky Way has a lower metallicity than our solar
neighbourhood, but still many molecules are detected in the region. Molecular
line ratios can serve as probes to better understand the chemistry and physics
in these regions. Aims. We use interpretable machine learning to study 9
different molecular ratios, helping us understand the forward connection between
the physics of these environments and the carbon and oxygen chemistries.
Methods. Using a large grid of astrochemical models generated using UCLCHEM, we
study the properties of molecular clouds of low oxygen and carbon initial
abundance. We first try to understand the line ratios using a classical
analysis. We then move on to using interpretable machine learning, namely
Shapley Additive Explanations (SHAP), to understand the higher order
dependencies of the ratios over the entire parameter grid. Lastly we use the
Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection technique (UMAP) as a reduction
method to create intuitive groupings of models. Results. We find that the
parameter space is well covered by the line ratios, allowing us to investigate
all input parameters. SHAP analysis shows that the temperature and density are
the most important features, but the carbon and oxygen abundances are important
in parts of the parameter space. Lastly, we find that we can group different
types of ratios using UMAP. Conclusions. We show the chosen ratios are mostly
sensitive to changes in the carbon initial abundance, together with the
temperature and density. Especially the CN/HCN and HNC/HCN ratio are shown to be
sensitive to the initial carbon abundance, making them excellent probes for this
parameter. Out of the ratios, only CS/SO shows a sensitivity to the oxygen
abundance.
