Title: Diversity of Transformer Layers: One Aspect of Parameter Scaling Laws
Authors: Hidetaka Kamigaito, Ying Zhang, Jingun Kwon, Katsuhiko Hayashi, Manabu
Okumura, Taro Watanabe
ID: 2505.24009
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.24009

Abstract:
Transformers deliver outstanding performance across a wide range of tasks and
are now a dominant backbone architecture for large language models (LLMs). Their
task-solving performance is improved by increasing parameter size, as shown in
the recent studies on parameter scaling laws. Although recent mechanistic-
interpretability studies have deepened our understanding of the internal
behavior of Transformers by analyzing their residual stream, the relationship
between these internal mechanisms and the parameter scaling laws remains
unclear. To bridge this gap, we focus on layers and their size, which mainly
decide the parameter size of Transformers. For this purpose, we first
theoretically investigate the layers within the residual stream through a bias-
diversity decomposition. The decomposition separates (i) bias, the error of each
layer's output from the ground truth, and (ii) diversity, which indicates how
much the outputs of each layer differ from each other. Analyzing Transformers
under this theory reveals that performance improves when individual layers make
predictions close to the correct answer and remain mutually diverse. We show
that diversity becomes especially critical when individual layers' outputs are
far from the ground truth. Finally, we introduce an information-theoretic
diversity and show our main findings that adding layers enhances performance
only when those layers behave differently, i.e., are diverse. We also reveal the
performance gains from increasing the number of layers exhibit submodularity:
marginal improvements diminish as additional layers increase, mirroring the
logarithmic convergence predicted by the parameter scaling laws. Experiments on
multiple semantic-understanding tasks with various LLMs empirically confirm the
theoretical properties derived in this study.
