Title: Fashion Industry in the Age of Generative Artificial Intelligence and
Metaverse: A systematic Review
Authors: Rania Ahmed, Eman Ahmed, Ahmed Elbarbary, Ashraf Darwish, Aboul Ella
Hassanien
ID: 2505.17141
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.17141

Abstract:
The fashion industry is an extremely profitable market that generates trillions
of dollars in revenue by producing and distributing apparel, footwear, and
accessories. This systematic literature review (SLR) seeks to systematically
review and analyze the research landscape about the Generative Artificial
Intelligence (GAI) and metaverse in the fashion industry. Thus, investigating
the impact of integrating both technologies to enhance the fashion industry.
This systematic review uses the Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-
Analyses (PRISMA) methodology, including three essential phases: identification,
evaluation, and reporting. In the identification phase, the target search
problems are determined by selecting appropriate keywords and alternative
synonyms. After that 578 documents from 2014 to the end of 2023 are retrieved.
The evaluation phase applies three screening steps to assess papers and choose
118 eligible papers for full-text reading. Finally, the reporting phase
thoroughly examines and synthesizes the 118 eligible papers to identify key
themes associated with GAI and Metaverse in the fashion industry. Based on
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats (SWOT) analyses performed for
both GAI and metaverse for the fashion industry, it is concluded that the
integration of GAI and the metaverse holds the capacity to profoundly
revolutionize the fashion sector, presenting chances for improved manufacturing,
design, sales, and client experiences. Accordingly, the research proposes a new
framework to integrate GAI and metaverse to enhance the fashion industry. The
framework presents different use cases to promote the fashion industry using the
integration. Future research points for achieving a successful integration are
demonstrated.
