Title: Smart Waste Management System for Makkah City using Artificial
Intelligence and Internet of Things
Authors: Rawabi S. Al Qurashi, Maram M. Almnjomi, Teef L. Alghamdi, Amjad H.
Almalki, Shahad S. Alharthi, Shahad M. althobuti, Alanoud S. Alharthi, Maha A.
Thafar
ID: 2505.19040
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.19040

Abstract:
Waste management is a critical global issue with significant environmental and
public health implications. It has become more destructive during large-scale
events such as the annual pilgrimage to Makkah, Saudi Arabia, one of the world's
largest religious gatherings. This event's popularity has attracted millions
worldwide, leading to significant and un-predictable accumulation of waste. Such
a tremendous number of visitors leads to in-creased waste management issues at
the Grand Mosque and other holy sites, highlighting the need for an effective
solution other than traditional methods based on rigid collection schedules.
  To address this challenge, this research proposed an innovative solution that
is context-specific and tailored to the unique requirements of pilgrimage
season: a Smart Waste Management System, called TUHR, that utilizes the Internet
of Things and Artificial Intelligence. This system encompasses ultrasonic
sensors that monitor waste levels in each container at the performance sites.
Once the container reaches full capacity, the sensor communicates with the
microcontroller, which alerts the relevant authorities. Moreover, our system can
detect harmful substances such as gas from the gas detector sensor. Such a
proactive and dynamic approach promises to mitigate the environmental and health
risks associated with waste accumulation and enhance the cleanliness of these
sites. It also delivers economic benefits by reducing unnecessary gasoline
consumption and optimizing waste management resources. Importantly, this
research aligns with the principles of smart cities and exemplifies the
innovative, sustainable, and health-conscious approach that Saudi Arabia is
implementing as part of its Vision 2030 initiative.
