Title: How Do Companies Manage the Environmental Sustainability of AI? An
Interview Study About Green AI Efforts and Regulations
Authors: Ashmita Sampatsing, Sophie Vos, Emma Beauxis-Aussalet, Justus Bogner
ID: 2505.07317
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.07317

Abstract:
With the ever-growing adoption of artificial intelligence (AI), AI-based
software and its negative impact on the environment are no longer negligible,
and studying and mitigating this impact has become a critical area of research.
However, it is currently unclear which role environmental sustainability plays
during AI adoption in industry and how AI regulations influence Green AI
practices and decision-making in industry. We therefore aim to investigate the
Green AI perception and management of industry practitioners. To this end, we
conducted a total of 11 interviews with participants from 10 different
organizations that adopted AI-based software. The interviews explored three main
themes: AI adoption, current efforts in mitigating the negative environmental
impact of AI, and the influence of the EU AI Act and the Corporate
Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD). Our findings indicate that 9 of 11
participants prioritized business efficiency during AI adoption, with minimal
consideration of environmental sustainability. Monitoring and mitigation of AI's
environmental impact were very limited. Only one participant monitored negative
environmental effects. Regarding applied mitigation practices, six participants
reported no actions, with the others sporadically mentioning techniques like
prompt engineering, relying on smaller models, or not overusing AI. Awareness
and compliance with the EU AI Act are low, with only one participant reporting
on its influence, while the CSRD drove sustainability reporting efforts
primarily in larger companies. All in all, our findings reflect a lack of
urgency and priority for sustainable AI among these companies. We suggest that
current regulations are not very effective, which has implications for
policymakers. Additionally, there is a need to raise industry awareness, but
also to provide user-friendly techniques and tools for Green AI practices.
