Title: AI-driven software for automated quantification of skeletal metastases
and treatment response evaluation using Whole-Body Diffusion-Weighted MRI (WB-
DWI) in Advanced Prostate Cancer
Authors: Antonio Candito, Matthew D Blackledge, Richard Holbrey, Nuria Porta,
Ana Ribeiro, Fabio Zugni, Luca D'Erme, Francesca Castagnoli, Alina Dragan,
Ricardo Donners, Christina Messiou, Nina Tunariu, Dow-Mu Koh
ID: 2505.09011
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09011

Abstract:
Quantitative assessment of treatment response in Advanced Prostate Cancer (APC)
with bone metastases remains an unmet clinical need. Whole-Body Diffusion-
Weighted MRI (WB-DWI) provides two response biomarkers: Total Diffusion Volume
(TDV) and global Apparent Diffusion Coefficient (gADC). However, tracking post-
treatment changes of TDV and gADC from manually delineated lesions is cumbersome
and increases inter-reader variability. We developed a software to automate this
process. Core technologies include: (i) a weakly-supervised Residual U-Net model
generating a skeleton probability map to isolate bone; (ii) a statistical
framework for WB-DWI intensity normalisation, obtaining a signal-normalised
b=900s/mm^2 (b900) image; and (iii) a shallow convolutional neural network that
processes outputs from (i) and (ii) to generate a mask of suspected bone
lesions, characterised by higher b900 signal intensity due to restricted water
diffusion. This mask is applied to the gADC map to extract TDV and gADC
statistics. We tested the tool using expert-defined metastatic bone disease
delineations on 66 datasets, assessed repeatability of imaging biomarkers
(N=10), and compared software-based response assessment with a construct
reference standard (N=118). Average dice score between manual and automated
delineations was 0.6 for lesions within pelvis and spine, with an average
surface distance of 2mm. Relative differences for log-transformed TDV (log-TDV)
and median gADC were 8.8% and 5%, respectively. Repeatability analysis showed
coefficients of variation of 4.6% for log-TDV and 3.5% for median gADC, with
intraclass correlation coefficients of 0.94 or higher. The software achieved
80.5% accuracy, 84.3% sensitivity, and 85.7% specificity in assessing response
to treatment. Average computation time was 90s per scan.
