Title: Neuro-Symbolic Operator for Interpretable and Generalizable
Characterization of Complex Piezoelectric Systems
Authors: Abhishek Chandra, Taniya Kapoor, Mitrofan Curti, Koen Tiels, Elena A.
Lomonova
ID: 2505.24578
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.24578

Abstract:
Complex piezoelectric systems are foundational in industrial applications. Their
performance, however, is challenged by the nonlinear voltage-displacement
hysteretic relationships. Efficient characterization methods are, therefore,
essential for reliable design, monitoring, and maintenance. Recently proposed
neural operator methods serve as surrogates for system characterization but face
two pressing issues: interpretability and generalizability. State-of-the-art
(SOTA) neural operators are black-boxes, providing little insight into the
learned operator. Additionally, generalizing them to novel voltages and
predicting displacement profiles beyond the training domain is challenging,
limiting their practical use. To address these limitations, this paper proposes
a neuro-symbolic operator (NSO) framework that derives the analytical operators
governing hysteretic relationships. NSO first learns a Fourier neural operator
mapping voltage fields to displacement profiles, followed by a library-based
sparse model discovery method, generating white-box parsimonious models
governing the underlying hysteresis. These models enable accurate and
interpretable prediction of displacement profiles across varying and out-of-
distribution voltage fields, facilitating generalizability. The potential of NSO
is demonstrated by accurately predicting voltage-displacement hysteresis,
including butterfly-shaped relationships. Moreover, NSO predicts displacement
profiles even for noisy and low-fidelity voltage data, emphasizing its
robustness. The results highlight the advantages of NSO compared to SOTA neural
operators and model discovery methods on several evaluation metrics.
Consequently, NSO contributes to characterizing complex piezoelectric systems
while improving the interpretability and generalizability of neural operators,
essential for design, monitoring, maintenance, and other real-world scenarios.
