Title: Deep RL Needs Deep Behavior Analysis: Exploring Implicit Planning by
Model-Free Agents in Open-Ended Environments
Authors: Riley Simmons-Edler, Ryan P. Badman, Felix Baastad Berg, Raymond Chua,
John J. Vastola, Joshua Lunger, William Qian, Kanaka Rajan
ID: 2506.06981
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.06981

Abstract:
Understanding the behavior of deep reinforcement learning (DRL) agents
-particularly as task and agent sophistication increase- requires more than
simple comparison of reward curves, yet standard methods for behavioral analysis
remain underdeveloped in DRL. We apply tools from neuroscience and ethology to
study DRL agents in a novel, complex, partially observable environment,
ForageWorld, designed to capture key aspects of real-world animal foraging-
including sparse, depleting resource patches, predator threats, and spatially
extended arenas. We use this environment as a platform for applying joint
behavioral and neural analysis to agents, revealing detailed, quantitatively
grounded insights into agent strategies, memory, and planning. Contrary to
common assumptions, we find that model-free RNN-based DRL agents can exhibit
structured, planning-like behavior purely through emergent dynamics- without
requiring explicit memory modules or world models. Our results show that
studying DRL agents like animals -analyzing them with neuroethology-inspired
tools that reveal structure in both behavior and neural dynamics- uncovers rich
structure in their learning dynamics that would otherwise remain invisible. We
distill these tools into a general analysis framework linking core behavioral
and representational features to diagnostic methods, which can be reused for a
wide range of tasks and agents. As agents grow more complex and autonomous,
bridging neuroscience, cognitive science, and AI will be essential- not just for
understanding their behavior, but for ensuring safe alignment and maximizing
desirable behaviors that are hard to measure via reward. We show how this can be
done by drawing on lessons from how biological intelligence is studied.
