Title: QiMeng: Fully Automated Hardware and Software Design for Processor Chip
Authors: Rui Zhang, Yuanbo Wen, Shuyao Cheng, Di Huang, Shaohui Peng, Jiaming
Guo, Pengwei Jin, Jiacheng Zhao, Tianrui Ma, Yaoyu Zhu, Yifan Hao, Yongwei Zhao,
Shengwen Liang, Ying Wang, Xing Hu, Zidong Du, Huimin Cui, Ling Li, Qi Guo,
Yunji Chen
ID: 2506.05007
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.05007

Abstract:
Processor chip design technology serves as a key frontier driving breakthroughs
in computer science and related fields. With the rapid advancement of
information technology, conventional design paradigms face three major
challenges: the physical constraints of fabrication technologies, the escalating
demands for design resources, and the increasing diversity of ecosystems.
Automated processor chip design has emerged as a transformative solution to
address these challenges. While recent breakthroughs in Artificial Intelligence
(AI), particularly Large Language Models (LLMs) techniques, have opened new
possibilities for fully automated processor chip design, substantial challenges
remain in establishing domain-specific LLMs for processor chip design.
  In this paper, we propose QiMeng, a novel system for fully automated hardware
and software design of processor chips. QiMeng comprises three hierarchical
layers. In the bottom-layer, we construct a domain-specific Large Processor Chip
Model (LPCM) that introduces novel designs in architecture, training, and
inference, to address key challenges such as knowledge representation gap, data
scarcity, correctness assurance, and enormous solution space. In the middle-
layer, leveraging the LPCM's knowledge representation and inference
capabilities, we develop the Hardware Design Agent and the Software Design Agent
to automate the design of hardware and software for processor chips. Currently,
several components of QiMeng have been completed and successfully applied in
various top-layer applications, demonstrating significant advantages and
providing a feasible solution for efficient, fully automated hardware/software
design of processor chips. Future research will focus on integrating all
components and performing iterative top-down and bottom-up design processes to
establish a comprehensive QiMeng system.
