Title: Machine learning for in-situ composition mapping in a self-driving
magnetron sputtering system
Authors: Sanna Jarl, Jens Sjölund, Robert J. W. Frost, Anders Holst, Jonathan J.
S. Scragg
ID: 2506.05999
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.05999

Abstract:
Self-driving labs (SDLs), employing automation and machine learning (ML) to
accelerate experimental procedures, have enormous potential in the discovery of
new materials. However, in thin film science, SDLs are mainly restricted to
solution-based synthetic methods which are easier to automate but cannot access
the broad chemical space of inorganic materials. This work presents an SDL based
on magnetron co-sputtering. We are using combinatorial frameworks, obtaining
accurate composition maps on multi-element, compositionally graded thin films.
This normally requires time-consuming ex-situ analysis prone to systematic
errors. We present a rapid and calibration-free in-situ, ML driven approach to
produce composition maps for arbitrary source combinations and sputtering
conditions. We develop a method to predict the composition distribution in a
multi-element combinatorial thin film, using in-situ measurements from quartz-
crystal microbalance sensors placed in a sputter chamber. For a given source,
the sensor readings are learned as a function of the sputtering pressure and
magnetron power, through active learning using Gaussian processes (GPs). The
final GPs are combined with a geometric model of the deposition flux
distribution in the chamber, which allows interpolation of the deposition rates
from each source, at any position across the sample. We investigate several
acquisition functions for the ML procedure. A fully Bayesian GP - BALM (Bayesian
active learning MacKay) - achieved the best performance, learning the deposition
rates for a single source in 10 experiments. Prediction accuracy for co-
sputtering composition distributions was verified experimentally. Our framework
dramatically increases throughput by avoiding the need for extensive
characterisation or calibration, thus demonstrating the potential of ML-guided
SDLs to accelerate materials exploration.
