Title: Meta-learning enhanced adaptive robot control strategy for automated PCB
assembly
Authors: Jieyang Peng, Dongkun Wang, Junkai Zhao, Yunfei Teng, Andreas Kimmig,
Xiaoming Tao, Jivka Ovtcharova
ID: 2506.20445
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.20445

Abstract:
The assembly of printed circuit boards (PCBs) is one of the standard processes
in chip production, directly contributing to the quality and performance of the
chips. In the automated PCB assembly process, machine vision and coordinate
localization methods are commonly employed to guide the positioning of assembly
units. However, occlusion or poor lighting conditions can affect the
effectiveness of machine vision-based methods. Additionally, the assembly of
odd-form components requires highly specialized fixtures for assembly unit
positioning, leading to high costs and low flexibility, especially for multi-
variety and small-batch production. Drawing on these considerations, a vision-
free, model-agnostic meta-method for compensating robotic position errors is
proposed, which maximizes the probability of accurate robotic positioning
through interactive feedback, thereby reducing the dependency on visual feedback
and mitigating the impact of occlusions or lighting variations. The proposed
method endows the robot with the capability to learn and adapt to various
position errors, inspired by the human instinct for grasping under
uncertainties. Furthermore, it is a self-adaptive method that can accelerate the
robotic positioning process as more examples are incorporated and learned.
Empirical studies show that the proposed method can handle a variety of odd-form
components without relying on specialized fixtures, while achieving similar
assembly efficiency to highly dedicated automation equipment. As of the writing
of this paper, the proposed meta-method has already been implemented in a
robotic-based assembly line for odd-form electronic components. Since PCB
assembly involves various electronic components with different sizes, shapes,
and functions, subsequent studies can focus on assembly sequence and assembly
route optimization to further enhance assembly efficiency.
