Title: A Survey of LLM-Driven AI Agent Communication: Protocols, Security Risks,
and Defense Countermeasures
Authors: Dezhang Kong, Shi Lin, Zhenhua Xu, Zhebo Wang, Minghao Li, Yufeng Li,
Yilun Zhang, Hujin Peng, Xiang Chen, Zeyang Sha, Yuyuan Li, Changting Lin, Xun
Wang, Xuan Liu, Ningyu Zhang, Chaochao Chen, Chunming Wu, Muhammad Khurram Khan,
Meng Han
ID: 2506.19676
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.19676

Abstract:
In recent years, Large-Language-Model-driven AI agents have exhibited
unprecedented intelligence and adaptability. Nowadays, agents are undergoing a
new round of evolution. They no longer act as an isolated island like LLMs.
Instead, they start to communicate with diverse external entities, such as other
agents and tools, to perform complex tasks. Under this trend, agent
communication is regarded as a foundational pillar of the next communication
era, and many organizations have intensively begun to design related
communication protocols (e.g., Anthropic's MCP and Google's A2A) within the past
year. However, this new field exposes significant security hazards, which can
cause severe damage to real-world scenarios. To help researchers quickly figure
out this promising topic and benefit the future agent communication development,
this paper presents a comprehensive survey of agent communication security. More
precisely, we present the first clear definition of agent communication.
Besides, we propose a framework that categorizes agent communication into three
classes and uses a three-layered communication architecture to illustrate how
each class works. Next, for each communication class, we dissect related
communication protocols and analyze the security risks, illustrating which
communication layer the risks arise from. Then, we provide an outlook on the
possible defense countermeasures for each risk. In addition, we conduct
experiments using MCP and A2A to help readers better understand the novel
vulnerabilities brought by agent communication. Finally, we discuss open issues
and future directions in this promising research field. We also publish a
repository that maintains a list of related papers on
https://github.com/theshi-1128/awesome-agent-communication-security.
