Title: Going beyond density functional theory accuracy: Leveraging experimental
data to refine pre-trained machine learning interatomic potentials
Authors: Shriya Gumber, Lorena Alzate-Vargas, Benjamin T. Nebgen, Arjen van
Veelen, Smit Kadvani, Tammie Gibson, Richard Messerly
ID: 2506.10211
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.10211

Abstract:
Machine learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs) are inherently limited by the
accuracy of the training data, usually consisting of energies and forces
obtained from quantum mechanical calculations, such as density functional theory
(DFT). Since DFT itself is based on several approximations, MLIPs may inherit
systematic errors that lead to discrepancies with experimental data. In this
paper, we use a trajectory re-weighting technique to refine DFT pre-trained
MLIPs to match the target experimental Extended X-ray Absorption Fine Structure
(EXAFS) spectra. EXAFS spectra are sensitive to the local structural environment
around an absorbing atom. Thus, refining an MLIP to improve agreement with
experimental EXAFS spectra also improves the MLIP prediction of other structural
properties that are not directly involved in the refinement process. We combine
this re-weighting technique with transfer learning and a minimal number of
training epochs to avoid overfitting to the limited experimental data. The
refinement approach demonstrates significant improvement for two MLIPs reported
in previous work, one for an established nuclear fuel: uranium dioxide (UO2) and
second one for a nuclear fuel candidate: uranium mononitride (UN). We validate
the effectiveness of our approach by comparing the results obtained from the
original (unrefined) DFT-based MLIP and the EXAFS-refined MLIP across various
properties, such as lattice parameters, bulk modulus, heat capacity, point
defect energies, elastic constants, phonon dispersion spectra, and diffusion
coefficients. An accurate MLIP for nuclear fuels is extremely beneficial as it
enables reliable atomistic simulation, which greatly reduces the need for large
number of expensive and inherently dangerous experimental nuclear integral
tests, traditionally required for the qualification of efficient and resilient
fuel candidates.
