Title: Why Robots Are Bad at Detecting Their Mistakes: Limitations of
Miscommunication Detection in Human-Robot Dialogue
Authors: Ruben Janssens, Jens De Bock, Sofie Labat, Eva Verhelst, Veronique
Hoste, Tony Belpaeme
ID: 2506.20268
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.20268

Abstract:
Detecting miscommunication in human-robot interaction is a critical function for
maintaining user engagement and trust. While humans effortlessly detect
communication errors in conversations through both verbal and non-verbal cues,
robots face significant challenges in interpreting non-verbal feedback, despite
advances in computer vision for recognizing affective expressions. This research
evaluates the effectiveness of machine learning models in detecting
miscommunications in robot dialogue. Using a multi-modal dataset of 240 human-
robot conversations, where four distinct types of conversational failures were
systematically introduced, we assess the performance of state-of-the-art
computer vision models. After each conversational turn, users provided feedback
on whether they perceived an error, enabling an analysis of the models' ability
to accurately detect robot mistakes. Despite using state-of-the-art models, the
performance barely exceeds random chance in identifying miscommunication, while
on a dataset with more expressive emotional content, they successfully
identified confused states. To explore the underlying cause, we asked human
raters to do the same. They could also only identify around half of the induced
miscommunications, similarly to our model. These results uncover a fundamental
limitation in identifying robot miscommunications in dialogue: even when users
perceive the induced miscommunication as such, they often do not communicate
this to their robotic conversation partner. This knowledge can shape
expectations of the performance of computer vision models and can help
researchers to design better human-robot conversations by deliberately eliciting
feedback where needed.
