Title: The Rise of AI Companions: How Human-Chatbot Relationships Influence
Well-Being
Authors: Yutong Zhang, Dora Zhao, Jeffrey T. Hancock, Robert Kraut, Diyi Yang
ID: 2506.12605
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.12605

Abstract:
As large language models (LLMs)-enhanced chatbots grow increasingly expressive
and socially responsive, many users are beginning to form companionship-like
bonds with them, particularly with simulated AI partners designed to mimic
emotionally attuned interlocutors. These emerging AI companions raise critical
questions: Can such systems fulfill social needs typically met by human
relationships? How do they shape psychological well-being? And what new risks
arise as users develop emotional ties to non-human agents? This study
investigates how people interact with AI companions, especially simulated
partners on CharacterAI, and how this use is associated with users'
psychological well-being. We analyzed survey data from 1,131 users and 4,363
chat sessions (413,509 messages) donated by 244 participants, focusing on three
dimensions of use: nature of the interaction, interaction intensity, and self-
disclosure. By triangulating self-reports primary motivation, open-ended
relationship descriptions, and annotated chat transcripts, we identify patterns
in how users engage with AI companions and its associations with well-being.
Findings suggest that people with smaller social networks are more likely to
turn to chatbots for companionship, but that companionship-oriented chatbot
usage is consistently associated with lower well-being, particularly when people
use the chatbots more intensively, engage in higher levels of self-disclosure,
and lack strong human social support. Even though some people turn to chatbots
to fulfill social needs, these uses of chatbots do not fully substitute for
human connection. As a result, the psychological benefits may be limited, and
the relationship could pose risks for more socially isolated or emotionally
vulnerable users.
