Title: AIn't Nothing But a Survey? Using Large Language Models for Coding German
Open-Ended Survey Responses on Survey Motivation
Authors: Leah von der Heyde, Anna-Carolina Haensch, Bernd Weiß, Jessica Daikeler
ID: 2506.14634
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.14634

Abstract:
The recent development and wider accessibility of LLMs have spurred discussions
about how they can be used in survey research, including classifying open-ended
survey responses. Due to their linguistic capacities, it is possible that LLMs
are an efficient alternative to time-consuming manual coding and the pre-
training of supervised machine learning models. As most existing research on
this topic has focused on English-language responses relating to non-complex
topics or on single LLMs, it is unclear whether its findings generalize and how
the quality of these classifications compares to established methods. In this
study, we investigate to what extent different LLMs can be used to code open-
ended survey responses in other contexts, using German data on reasons for
survey participation as an example. We compare several state-of-the-art LLMs and
several prompting approaches, and evaluate the LLMs' performance by using human
expert codings. Overall performance differs greatly between LLMs, and only a
fine-tuned LLM achieves satisfactory levels of predictive performance.
Performance differences between prompting approaches are conditional on the LLM
used. Finally, LLMs' unequal classification performance across different
categories of reasons for survey participation results in different categorical
distributions when not using fine-tuning. We discuss the implications of these
findings, both for methodological research on coding open-ended responses and
for their substantive analysis, and for practitioners processing or
substantively analyzing such data. Finally, we highlight the many trade-offs
researchers need to consider when choosing automated methods for open-ended
response classification in the age of LLMs. In doing so, our study contributes
to the growing body of research about the conditions under which LLMs can be
efficiently, accurately, and reliably leveraged in survey research.
