Title: Massive Atomic Diversity: a compact universal dataset for atomistic
machine learning
Authors: Arslan Mazitov, Sofiia Chorna, Guillaume Fraux, Marnik Bercx, Giovanni
Pizzi, Sandip De, Michele Ceriotti
ID: 2506.19674
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.19674

Abstract:
The development of machine-learning models for atomic-scale simulations has
benefited tremendously from the large databases of materials and molecular
properties computed in the past two decades using electronic-structure
calculations. More recently, these databases have made it possible to train
universal models that aim at making accurate predictions for arbitrary atomic
geometries and compositions. The construction of many of these databases was
however in itself aimed at materials discovery, and therefore targeted primarily
to sample stable, or at least plausible, structures and to make the most
accurate predictions for each compound - e.g. adjusting the calculation details
to the material at hand. Here we introduce a dataset designed specifically to
train machine learning models that can provide reasonable predictions for
arbitrary structures, and that therefore follows a different philosophy.
Starting from relatively small sets of stable structures, the dataset is built
to contain massive atomic diversity (MAD) by aggressively distorting these
configurations, with near-complete disregard for the stability of the resulting
configurations. The electronic structure details, on the other hand, are chosen
to maximize consistency rather than to obtain the most accurate prediction for a
given structure, or to minimize computational effort. The MAD dataset we present
here, despite containing fewer than 100k structures, has already been shown to
enable training universal interatomic potentials that are competitive with
models trained on traditional datasets with two to three orders of magnitude
more structures. We describe in detail the philosophy and details of the
construction of the MAD dataset. We also introduce a low-dimensional structural
latent space that allows us to compare it with other popular datasets and that
can be used as a general-purpose materials cartography tool.
