Title: Quantum Physics-Informed Neural Networks for Maxwell's Equations: Circuit
Design, "Black Hole" Barren Plateaus Mitigation, and GPU Acceleration
Authors: Ziv Chen, Gal G. Shaviner, Hemanth Chandravamsi, Shimon Pisnoy, Steven
H. Frankel, Uzi Pereg
ID: 2506.23246
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.23246

Abstract:
Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) have emerged as a promising approach
for solving partial differential equations (PDEs) by embedding the governing
physics into the loss function associated with a deep neural network. In this
work, a Quantum PINNs (QPINN) framework is proposed to solve two-dimensional
(2D) time-dependent Maxwell's equations. Our approach utilizes a parametrized
quantum circuit in conjunction with the classical neural network architecture
and enforces physical laws, including a global energy conservation principle,
during training. A quantum simulation library, TorQ, was developed to
efficiently compute circuit outputs and derivatives by leveraging GPU
acceleration based on PyTorch, enabling end-to-end training of the QPINN. The
method was evaluated on two 2D electromagnetic wave propagation problems: one in
free space (vacuum) and the other has an added dielectric medium. Multiple
quantum circuit ansätze, input scales, and an added loss term were compared in a
thorough ablation study. Furthermore, recent techniques to enhance PINN
convergence, including random Fourier feature embeddings and adaptive time
weighting, have been incorporated. Our results demonstrate that the QPINN
achieves accuracy comparable to, and even greater than, the classical PINN
baseline, while using a significantly smaller number of trainable parameters.
This study also shows that adding an energy conservation term to the loss
stabilizes training and improves the physical fidelity of the solution in the
lossless free-space case. This added term helps mitigate a new kind of barren
plateau (BP) related phenomenon - ``black hole'' (BH) loss landscape for the
quantum experiments in that scenario. By optimizing the quantum-circuit ansatz
and embedding energy-conservation constraints, our QPINN achieves up to a 19%
higher accuracy on 2D Maxwell benchmark problems compared to a classical PINN.
