Title: Efficient Training for Optical Computing
Authors: Manon P. Bart, Nick Sparks, Ryan T. Glasser
ID: 2506.20833
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.20833

Abstract:
Diffractive optical information processors have demonstrated significant promise
in delivering high-speed, parallel, and energy efficient inference for scaling
machine learning tasks. Training, however, remains a major computational
bottleneck, compounded by large datasets and many simulations required for
state-of-the-art classification models. The underlying linear transformations in
such systems are inherently constrained to compositions of circulant and
diagonal matrix factors, representing free-space propagation and phase and/or
amplitude modulation of light, respectively. While theoretically established
that an arbitrary linear transformation can be generated by such factors, only
upper bounds on the number of factors exist, which are experimentally
unfeasible. Additionally, physical parameters such as inter-layer distance,
number of layers, and phase-only modulation further restrict the solution space.
Without tractable analytical decompositions, prior works have implemented
various constrained minimization techniques. As trainable elements occupy a
small subset of the overall transformation, existing techniques incur
unnecessary computational overhead, limiting scalability. In this work, we
demonstrate significant reduction in training time by exploiting the structured
and sparse nature of diffractive systems in training and inference. We introduce
a novel backpropagation algorithm that incorporates plane wave decomposition via
the Fourier transform, computing gradients across all trainable elements in a
given layer simultaneously, using only change-of-basis and element wise
multiplication. Given the lack of a closed-form mathematical decomposition for
realizable optical architectures, this approach is not only valuable for machine
learning tasks but broadly applicable for the generation of arbitrary linear
transformations, wavefront shaping, and other signal processing tasks.
