Title: Optimizing Solar Energy Production in the USA: Time-Series Analysis Using
AI for Smart Energy Management
Authors: Istiaq Ahmed, Md Asif Ul Hoq Khan, MD Zahedul Islam, Md Sakibul Hasan,
Tanaya Jakir, Arat Hossain, Joynal Abed, Muhammad Hasanuzzaman, Sadia Sharmeen
Shatyi, Kazi Nehal Hasnain
ID: 2506.23368
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.23368

Abstract:
As the US rapidly moves towards cleaner energy sources, solar energy is fast
becoming the pillar of its renewable energy mix. Even while solar energy is
increasingly being used, its variability is a key hindrance to grid stability,
storage efficiency, and system stability overall. Solar energy has emerged as
one of the fastest-growing renewable energy sources in the United States, adding
noticeably to the country's energy mix. Retrospectively, the necessity of
inserting the sun's energy into the grid without disrupting reliability and cost
efficiencies highlights the necessity of good forecasting software and smart
control systems. The dataset utilized for this research project comprised both
hourly and daily solar energy production records collected from multiple
utility-scale solar farms across diverse U.S. regions, including California,
Texas, and Arizona. Training and evaluation of all models were performed with a
time-based cross-validation scheme, namely, sliding window validation. Both the
Random Forest and the XG-Boost models demonstrated noticeably greater and the
same performance across each of the measures considered, with relatively high
accuracy. The almost perfect and equal performance by the Random Forest and XG-
Boost models also shows both models to have learned the patterns in the data
very comprehensively, with high reliability in their predictions. By
incorporating AI-powered time-series models like XG-Boost in grid management
software, utility companies can dynamically modify storage cycles in real-time
as well as dispatch and peak load planning, based on their predictions. AI-
powered solar forecasting also has profound implications for renewable energy
policy and planning, particularly as U.S. federal and state governments
accelerate toward ambitious decarbonization goals.
