Title: Exploring Artificial Intelligence Tutor Teammate Adaptability to Harness
Discovery Curiosity and Promote Learning in the Context of Interactive Molecular
Dynamics
Authors: Mustafa Demir, Jacob Miratsky, Jonathan Nguyen, Chun Kit Chan, Punya
Mishra, Abhishek Singharoy
ID: 2506.22520
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.22520

Abstract:
This study examines the impact of an Artificial Intelligence tutor teammate (AI)
on student curiosity-driven engagement and learning effectiveness during
Interactive Molecular Dynamics (IMD) tasks on the Visual Molecular Dynamics
platform. It explores the role of the AI's curiosity-triggering and response
behaviors in stimulating and sustaining student curiosity, affecting the
frequency and complexity of student-initiated questions. The study further
assesses how AI interventions shape student engagement, foster discovery
curiosity, and enhance team performance within the IMD learning environment.
Using a Wizard-of-Oz paradigm, a human experimenter dynamically adjusts the AI
tutor teammate's behavior through a large language model. By employing a mixed-
methods exploratory design, a total of 11 high school students participated in
four IMD tasks that involved molecular visualization and calculations, which
increased in complexity over a 60-minute period. Team performance was evaluated
through real-time observation and recordings, whereas team communication was
measured by question complexity and AI's curiosity-triggering and response
behaviors. Cross Recurrence Quantification Analysis (CRQA) metrics reflected
structural alignment in coordination and were linked to communication behaviors.
High-performing teams exhibited superior task completion, deeper understanding,
and increased engagement. Advanced questions were associated with AI curiosity-
triggering, indicating heightened engagement and cognitive complexity. CRQA
metrics highlighted dynamic synchronization in student-AI interactions,
emphasizing structured yet adaptive engagement to promote curiosity. These
proof-of-concept findings suggest that the AI's dual role as a teammate and
educator indicates its capacity to provide adaptive feedback, sustaining
engagement and epistemic curiosity.
