Title: Kaleidoscopic Teaming in Multi Agent Simulations
Authors: Ninareh Mehrabi, Tharindu Kumarage, Kai-Wei Chang, Aram Galstyan, Rahul
Gupta
ID: 2506.17514
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.17514

Abstract:
Warning: This paper contains content that may be inappropriate or offensive.
  AI agents have gained significant recent attention due to their autonomous
tool usage capabilities and their integration in various real-world
applications. This autonomy poses novel challenges for the safety of such
systems, both in single- and multi-agent scenarios. We argue that existing red
teaming or safety evaluation frameworks fall short in evaluating safety risks in
complex behaviors, thought processes and actions taken by agents. Moreover, they
fail to consider risks in multi-agent setups where various vulnerabilities can
be exposed when agents engage in complex behaviors and interactions with each
other. To address this shortcoming, we introduce the term kaleidoscopic teaming
which seeks to capture complex and wide range of vulnerabilities that can happen
in agents both in single-agent and multi-agent scenarios. We also present a new
kaleidoscopic teaming framework that generates a diverse array of scenarios
modeling real-world human societies. Our framework evaluates safety of agents in
both single-agent and multi-agent setups. In single-agent setup, an agent is
given a scenario that it needs to complete using the tools it has access to. In
multi-agent setup, multiple agents either compete against or cooperate together
to complete a task in the scenario through which we capture existing safety
vulnerabilities in agents. We introduce new in-context optimization techniques
that can be used in our kaleidoscopic teaming framework to generate better
scenarios for safety analysis. Lastly, we present appropriate metrics that can
be used along with our framework to measure safety of agents. Utilizing our
kaleidoscopic teaming framework, we identify vulnerabilities in various models
with respect to their safety in agentic use-cases.
