Title: Scaling Laws for Geospatial Foundation Models: A case study on PhilEO
Bench
Authors: Nikolaos Dionelis, Riccardo Musto, Jente Bosmans, Simone Sarti,
Giancarlo Paoletti, Peter Naylor, Valerio Marsocci, Sébastien Lefèvre, Bertrand
Le Saux, Nicolas Longépé
ID: 2506.14765
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.14765

Abstract:
Foundation Models (FMs) have achieved state-of-the-art performance across
domains by leveraging large-scale pretraining. In Earth Observation (EO), the
availability of petabyte-scale satellite archives has recently enabled the
development of GeoSpatial Foundation Models (GFMs). Yet, fundamental questions
remain regarding how dataset size, model architecture, and size interact to
determine downstream performance. In this work, we systematically explore this
design space by pretraining and fine-tuning models on three dataset scales:
PhilEO Globe (0.5TB), FastTOM (2TB, introduced here), and MajorTOM (23TB). We
evaluate three architectural families: Geo-Aware U-Net (CNN), ViT-UPerNet
(Transformer), and Mamba (State-Space Model); across model sizes ranging from
44M to 300M parameters. All models are benchmarked on the PhilEO Bench,
covering: road density and building density regression, and land cover
segmentation, and are compared against existing GFMs such as TerraMind and
Prithvi-EO-2.0. Our results show that CNN-based models remain highly competitive
in low-shot settings, with a 200M-parameter Geo-Aware U-Net outperforming larger
architectures on regression tasks. However, when scaling to multi-terabyte
datasets, ViT-UPerNet achieves the best performance, particularly for semantic
segmentation on MajorTOM (23TB). Finally, we provide the first extensive
evaluation of Mamba models in EO, highlighting their potential efficiency
advantages, though further large-scale pretraining is required to fully match
CNNs and ViTs. All code, pretrained models, and the FastTOM dataset are released
publicly, enabling reproducibility and further exploration of scaling laws for
GFMs.
