Title: Designing for Difference: How Human Characteristics Shape Perceptions of
Collaborative Robots
Authors: Sabrina Livanec, Laura Londoño, Michael Gorki, Adrian Röfer, Abhinav
Valada, Andrea Kiesel
ID: 2507.16480
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.16480

Abstract:
The development of assistive robots for social collaboration raises critical
questions about responsible and inclusive design, especially when interacting
with individuals from protected groups such as those with disabilities or
advanced age. Currently, research is scarce on how participants assess varying
robot behaviors in combination with diverse human needs, likely since
participants have limited real-world experience with advanced domestic robots.
In the current study, we aim to address this gap while using methods that enable
participants to assess robot behavior, as well as methods that support
meaningful reflection despite limited experience. In an online study, 112
participants (from both experimental and control groups) evaluated 7 videos from
a total of 28 variations of human-robot collaboration types. The experimental
group first completed a cognitive-affective mapping (CAM) exercise on human-
robot collaboration before providing their ratings. Although CAM reflection did
not significantly affect overall ratings, it led to more pronounced assessments
for certain combinations of robot behavior and human condition. Most
importantly, the type of human-robot collaboration influences the assessment.
Antisocial robot behavior was consistently rated as the lowest, while
collaboration with aged individuals elicited more sensitive evaluations.
Scenarios involving object handovers were viewed more positively than those
without them. These findings suggest that both human characteristics and
interaction paradigms influence the perceived acceptability of collaborative
robots, underscoring the importance of prosocial design. They also highlight the
potential of reflective methods, such as CAM, to elicit nuanced feedback,
supporting the development of user-centered and socially responsible robotic
systems tailored to diverse populations.
