Title: Information Field Theory based Event Reconstruction for Cosmic Ray Radio
Detectors
Authors: Simon Strähnz, Tim Huege, Torsten Enßlin, Karen Terveer, Anna Nelles
ID: 2507.10738
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.10738

Abstract:
Detection of extensive air showers with radio antennas is an appealing technique
in cosmic ray physics. However, because of the high level of measurement noise,
current reconstruction methods still leave room for improvement. Furthermore,
reconstruction efforts typically focus only on a single aspect of the signal,
such as the energy fluence or arrival time. Bayesian inference is then a natural
choice for a holistic approach to reconstruction, yet, this problem would be
ill-posed, since the electric field is a continuous quantity. Information Field
Theory provides the solution for this by providing a statistical framework to
deal with discretised fields in the continuum limit. We are currently developing
models for this novel approach to reconstructing extensive air showers. The
model described here is based on the best current understanding of the emission
mechanisms: It uses parametrisations of the lateral signal strength
distribution, charge-excess contribution and spectral shape. Shower-to-shower
fluctuations and narrowband RFI are modelled using Gaussian processes. Combined
with a detailed detector description, this model can infer not only the electric
field, but also the shower geometry, electromagnetic energy and position of
shower maximum. Another big achievement of this approach is its ability to
naturally provide uncertainties for the reconstruction, which has been shown to
be difficult in more traditional methods. With such an open framework and robust
computational methods based in Information Field Theory, it will also be easy to
incorporate new insights and additional data, such as timing distributions or
particle detector data, in the future. This approach has a high potential to
exploit the full information content of a complex detector with rigorous
statistical methods, in a way that directly includes domain knowledge.
