Title: Bottom-up Domain-specific Superintelligence: A Reliable Knowledge Graph
is What We Need
Authors: Bhishma Dedhia, Yuval Kansal, Niraj K. Jha
ID: 2507.13966
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.13966

Abstract:
Language models traditionally used for cross-domain generalization have recently
demonstrated task-specific reasoning. However, their top-down training approach
on general corpora is insufficient for acquiring abstractions needed for deep
domain expertise. This may require a bottom-up approach that acquires expertise
by learning to compose simple domain concepts into more complex ones. A
knowledge graph (KG) provides this compositional structure, where domain
primitives are represented as head-relation-tail edges and their paths encode
higher-level concepts. We present a task generation pipeline that synthesizes
tasks directly from KG primitives, enabling models to acquire and compose them
for reasoning. We fine-tune language models on the resultant KG-grounded
curriculum to demonstrate domain-specific superintelligence. While broadly
applicable, we validate our approach in medicine, where reliable KGs exist.
Using a medical KG, we curate 24,000 reasoning tasks paired with thinking traces
derived from diverse medical primitives. We fine-tune the QwQ-32B model on this
curriculum to obtain QwQ-Med-3 that takes a step towards medical
superintelligence. We also introduce ICD-Bench, an evaluation suite to quantify
reasoning abilities across 15 medical domains. Our experiments demonstrate that
QwQ-Med-3 significantly outperforms state-of-the-art reasoning models on ICD-
Bench categories. Further analysis reveals that QwQ-Med-3 utilizes acquired
primitives to widen the performance gap on the hardest tasks of ICD-Bench.
Finally, evaluation on medical question-answer benchmarks shows that QwQ-Med-3
transfers acquired expertise to enhance the base model's performance. While the
industry's approach to artificial general intelligence (AGI) emphasizes broad
expertise, we envision a future in which AGI emerges from the composable
interaction of efficient domain-specific superintelligent agents.
