Title: Towards Unified Neurosymbolic Reasoning on Knowledge Graphs
Authors: Qika Lin, Fangzhi Xu, Hao Lu, Kai He, Rui Mao, Jun Liu, Erik Cambria,
Mengling Feng
ID: 2507.03697
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.03697

Abstract:
Knowledge Graph (KG) reasoning has received significant attention in the fields
of artificial intelligence and knowledge engineering, owing to its ability to
autonomously deduce new knowledge and consequently enhance the availability and
precision of downstream applications. However, current methods predominantly
concentrate on a single form of neural or symbolic reasoning, failing to
effectively integrate the inherent strengths of both approaches. Furthermore,
the current prevalent methods primarily focus on addressing a single reasoning
scenario, presenting limitations in meeting the diverse demands of real-world
reasoning tasks. Unifying the neural and symbolic methods, as well as diverse
reasoning scenarios in one model is challenging as there is a natural
representation gap between symbolic rules and neural networks, and diverse
scenarios exhibit distinct knowledge structures and specific reasoning
objectives. To address these issues, we propose a unified neurosymbolic
reasoning framework, namely Tunsr, for KG reasoning. Tunsr first introduces a
consistent structure of reasoning graph that starts from the query entity and
constantly expands subsequent nodes by iteratively searching posterior
neighbors. Based on it, a forward logic message-passing mechanism is proposed to
update both the propositional representations and attentions, as well as first-
order logic (FOL) representations and attentions of each node. In this way,
Tunsr conducts the transformation of merging multiple rules by merging possible
relations at each step. Finally, the FARI algorithm is proposed to induce FOL
rules by constantly performing attention calculations over the reasoning graph.
Extensive experimental results on 19 datasets of four reasoning scenarios
(transductive, inductive, interpolation, and extrapolation) demonstrate the
effectiveness of Tunsr.
