Title: AutoDiscovery: Open-ended Scientific Discovery via Bayesian Surprise
Authors: Dhruv Agarwal, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Reece Adamson, Megha
Chakravorty, Satvika Reddy Gavireddy, Aditya Parashar, Harshit Surana, Bhavana
Dalvi Mishra, Andrew McCallum, Ashish Sabharwal, Peter Clark
ID: 2507.00310
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.00310

Abstract:
The promise of autonomous scientific discovery (ASD) hinges not only on
answering questions, but also on knowing which questions to ask. Most recent
works in ASD explore the use of large language models (LLMs) in goal-driven
settings, relying on human-specified research questions to guide hypothesis
generation. However, scientific discovery may be accelerated further by allowing
the AI system to drive exploration by its own criteria. The few existing
approaches in open-ended ASD select hypotheses based on diversity heuristics or
subjective proxies for human interestingness, but the former struggles to
meaningfully navigate the typically vast hypothesis space, and the latter
suffers from imprecise definitions. This paper presents AutoDiscovery -- a
method for open-ended ASD that instead drives scientific exploration using
Bayesian surprise. Here, we quantify the epistemic shift from the LLM's prior
beliefs about a hypothesis to its posterior beliefs after gathering experimental
results. To efficiently explore the space of nested hypotheses, our method
employs a Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) strategy with progressive widening
using surprisal as the reward function. We evaluate AutoDiscovery in the setting
of data-driven discovery across 21 real-world datasets spanning domains such as
biology, economics, finance, and behavioral science. Our results demonstrate
that under a fixed budget, AutoDiscovery substantially outperforms competitors
by producing 5-29% more discoveries deemed surprising by the LLM. Our human
evaluation further reveals that two-thirds of discoveries made by our system are
surprising to domain experts as well, suggesting this is an important step
towards building open-ended ASD systems.
