Title: CosmoBench: A Multiscale, Multiview, Multitask Cosmology Benchmark for
Geometric Deep Learning
Authors: Ningyuan Huang, Richard Stiskalek, Jun-Young Lee, Adrian E. Bayer,
Charles C. Margossian, Christian Kragh Jespersen, Lucia A. Perez, Lawrence K.
Saul, Francisco Villaescusa-Navarro
ID: 2507.03707
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.03707

Abstract:
Cosmological simulations provide a wealth of data in the form of point clouds
and directed trees. A crucial goal is to extract insights from this data that
shed light on the nature and composition of the Universe. In this paper we
introduce CosmoBench, a benchmark dataset curated from state-of-the-art
cosmological simulations whose runs required more than 41 million core-hours and
generated over two petabytes of data. CosmoBench is the largest dataset of its
kind: it contains 34 thousand point clouds from simulations of dark matter halos
and galaxies at three different length scales, as well as 25 thousand directed
trees that record the formation history of halos on two different time scales.
The data in CosmoBench can be used for multiple tasks -- to predict cosmological
parameters from point clouds and merger trees, to predict the velocities of
individual halos and galaxies from their collective positions, and to
reconstruct merger trees on finer time scales from those on coarser time scales.
We provide several baselines on these tasks, some based on established
approaches from cosmological modeling and others rooted in machine learning. For
the latter, we study different approaches -- from simple linear models that are
minimally constrained by symmetries to much larger and more computationally-
demanding models in deep learning, such as graph neural networks. We find that
least-squares fits with a handful of invariant features sometimes outperform
deep architectures with many more parameters and far longer training time. Still
there remains tremendous potential to improve these baselines by combining
machine learning and cosmology to fully exploit the data. CosmoBench sets the
stage for bridging cosmology and geometric deep learning at scale. We invite the
community to push the frontier of scientific discovery by engaging with this
dataset, available at https://cosmobench.streamlit.app
