Title: Digital and Robotic Twinning for Validation of Proximity Operations and
Formation Flying
Authors: Z. Ahmed, E. Bates, P. Francesch Huc, S. Y. W. Low, A. Golan, T. Bell,
A. Rizza, S. D'Amico
ID: 2507.20034
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.20034

Abstract:
Spacecraft Rendezvous, Proximity Operations (RPO), and Formation Flying (FF)
rely on safety-critical guidance, navigation and control (GNC) that must satisfy
stringent performance and robustness requirements. However, verifying GNC
performance is challenging due to the complexity and inaccessibility of the
space environment, necessitating a verification and validation (V\&V) process
that bridges simulation and real-world behavior. This paper contributes a
unified, closed-loop, end-to-end digital and robotic twinning framework that
enables software- and hardware-in-the-loop testing of spacecraft GNC systems.
The framework is designed for modularity and flexibility, supporting
interchangeable sensing modalities, control algorithms, and operational regimes.
The digital twin includes an event-driven faster-than-real-time simulation
environment to support rapid prototyping. The architecture is augmented with
hardware-based robotic testbeds from Stanford's Space Rendezvous Laboratory
(SLAB): the GNSS and Radiofrequency Autonomous Navigation Testbed for
Distributed Space Systems (GRAND) to validate RF-based navigation techniques,
and the Testbed for Rendezvous and Optical Navigation (TRON) and Optical
Stimulator (OS) to validate vision-based methods. The test article for this work
is an integrated multi-modal GNC software stack developed at SLAB. This paper
introduces the hybrid twinning framework, summarizes calibration and error
characterization of the robotic testbeds, and evaluates GNC performance across
multiple operational modes in a full-range RPO scenario in LEO. The results
demonstrate consistency between software- and hardware-in-the-loop tests with
clear explainability for deviations in performance, thus validating the hybrid
twinning pipeline as a reliable framework for realistic assessment and
verification of GNC systems.
