Title: Foundation Model Self-Play: Open-Ended Strategy Innovation via Foundation
Models
Authors: Aaron Dharna, Cong Lu, Jeff Clune
ID: 2507.06466
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.06466

Abstract:
Multi-agent interactions have long fueled innovation, from natural predator-prey
dynamics to the space race. Self-play (SP) algorithms try to harness these
dynamics by pitting agents against ever-improving opponents, thereby creating an
implicit curriculum toward learning high-quality solutions. However, SP often
fails to produce diverse solutions and can get stuck in locally optimal
behaviors. We introduce Foundation-Model Self-Play (FMSP), a new direction that
leverages the code-generation capabilities and vast knowledge of foundation
models (FMs) to overcome these challenges by leaping across local optima in
policy space. We propose a family of approaches: (1) \textbf{Vanilla Foundation-
Model Self-Play (vFMSP)} continually refines agent policies via competitive
self-play; (2) \textbf{Novelty-Search Self-Play (NSSP)} builds a diverse
population of strategies, ignoring performance; and (3) the most promising
variant, \textbf{Quality-Diveristy Self-Play (QDSP)}, creates a diverse set of
high-quality policies by combining the diversity of NSSP and refinement of
vFMSP. We evaluate FMSPs in Car Tag, a continuous-control pursuer-evader
setting, and in Gandalf, a simple AI safety simulation in which an attacker
tries to jailbreak an LLM's defenses. In Car Tag, FMSPs explore a wide variety
of reinforcement learning, tree search, and heuristic-based methods, to name
just a few. In terms of discovered policy quality, \ouralgo and vFMSP surpass
strong human-designed strategies. In Gandalf, FMSPs can successfully
automatically red-team an LLM, breaking through and jailbreaking six different,
progressively stronger levels of defense. Furthermore, FMSPs can automatically
proceed to patch the discovered vulnerabilities. Overall, FMSPs represent a
promising new research frontier of improving self-play with foundation models,
opening fresh paths toward more creative and open-ended strategy discovery
