Title: FlowsDT: A Geospatial Digital Twin for Navigating Urban Flood Dynamics
Authors: Debayan Mandal, Lei Zou, Abhinav Wadhwa, Rohan Singh Wilkho, Zhenhang
Cai, Bing Zhou, Xinyue Ye, Galen Newman, Nasir Gharaibeh, Burak Güneralp
ID: 2507.08850
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.08850

Abstract:
Communities worldwide increasingly confront flood hazards intensified by climate
change, urban expansion, and environmental degradation. Addressing these
challenges requires real-time flood analysis, precise flood forecasting, and
robust risk communications with stakeholders to implement efficient mitigation
strategies. Recent advances in hydrodynamic modeling and digital twins afford
new opportunities for high-resolution flood modeling and visualization at the
street and basement levels. Focusing on Galveston City, a barrier island in
Texas, U.S., this study created a geospatial digital twin (GDT) supported by
1D-2D coupled hydrodynamic models to strengthen urban resilience to pluvial and
fluvial flooding. The objectives include: (1) developing a GDT (FlowsDT-
Galveston) incorporating topography, hydrography, and infrastructure; (2)
validating the twin using historical flood events and social sensing; (3)
modeling hyperlocal flood conditions under 2-, 10-, 25-, 50-, and 100-year
return period rainfall scenarios; and (4) identifying at-risk zones under
different scenarios. This study employs the PCSWMM to create dynamic virtual
replicas of urban landscapes and accurate flood modeling. By integrating LiDAR
data, land cover, and storm sewer geometries, the model can simulate flood
depth, extent, duration, and velocity in a 4-D environment across different
historical and design storms. Results show buildings inundated over one foot
increased by 5.7% from 2- to 100-year flood. Road inundations above 1 foot
increased by 6.7% from 2- to 100-year floods. The proposed model can support
proactive flood management and urban planning in Galveston; and inform disaster
resilience efforts and guide sustainable infrastructure development. The
framework can be extended to other communities facing similar challenges.
