Title: Knowledge-Guided Machine Learning: Illustrating the use of Explainable
Boosting Machines to Identify Overshooting Tops in Satellite Imagery
Authors: Nathan Mitchell, Lander Ver Hoef, Imme Ebert-Uphoff, Kristina Moen,
Kyle Hilburn, Yoonjin Lee, Emily J. King
ID: 2507.03183
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.03183

Abstract:
Machine learning (ML) algorithms have emerged in many meteorological
applications. However, these algorithms struggle to extrapolate beyond the data
they were trained on, i.e., they may adopt faulty strategies that lead to
catastrophic failures. These failures are difficult to predict due to the opaque
nature of ML algorithms. In high-stakes applications, such as severe weather
forecasting, is is crucial to avoid such failures. One approach to address this
issue is to develop more interpretable ML algorithms. The primary goal of this
work is to illustrate the use of a specific interpretable ML algorithm that has
not yet found much use in meteorology, Explainable Boosting Machines (EBMs). We
demonstrate that EBMs are particularly suitable to implement human-guided
strategies in an ML algorithm. As guiding example, we show how to develop an EBM
to detect overshooting tops (OTs) in satellite imagery. EBMs require input
features to be scalar. We use techniques from Knowledge-Guided Machine Learning
to first extract scalar features from meteorological imagery. For the
application of identifying OTs this includes extracting cloud texture from
satellite imagery using Gray-Level Co-occurrence Matrices. Once trained, the EBM
was examined and minimally altered to more closely match strategies used by
domain scientists to identify OTs. The result of our efforts is a fully
interpretable ML algorithm developed in a human-machine collaboration that uses
human-guided strategies. While the final model does not reach the accuracy of
more complex approaches, it performs reasonably well and we hope paves the way
for building more interpretable ML algorithms for this and other meteorological
applications.
