Title: Generative artificial intelligence and hybrid models to accelerate LES in
reactive flows: Application to hydrogen/methane combustion
Authors: Xiangrui Zou, Rodrigo Abadia-Heredia, Laura Saavedra, Alessandro
Parente, Rui Xue, Soledad Le Clainche
ID: 2507.08426
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.08426

Abstract:
With increasing emphasis on carbon neutrality, accurate and efficient combustion
prediction has become essential for the design and optimization of new
generation combustion systems. This study established a computational framework
by combining large eddy simulation (LES) with a generative machine learning
approach which integrates modal decomposition and neural network, enabling fast
prediction of hydrogen-methane combustion. A canonical jet-in-hot-coflow burner
was selected as the benchmark configuration. LES was performed using eddy
dissipation concept model in conjunction with a 17-species and 58-step skeletal
mechanism. Reasonable agreement between LES results and experimental data was
obtained for temperature and species mass fraction, confirming the accuracy of
the present LES results. Flow characteristics and flame structures were
analyzed, providing a reference for choosing parameters in prediction. Proper
orthogonal decomposition (POD) was used to extract dominant flow features, and a
hybrid autoregressive model, which combines modal decomposition with a deep
learning (POD-DL) was constructed to forecast the temporal evolution of the
combustion field. Comparison between the predicted results and LES data,
including instantaneous contours, radial distributions, histogram and relative
root mean square error, demonstrated a reasonable agreement. The main complexity
lies in capturing the chaotic and fine-scale structures inherent to turbulent
combustion. To the authors' knowledge, this is the first application of such a
hybrid generative model to reactive flow prediction, representing an important
step toward using data-driven surrogates to accelerate CFD simulations in
combustion research. The proposed approach achieves speed-up ratios of 121 and
845 relative to LES for two tested cases. The implementation will be integrated
into the upcoming release of the ModelFLOWs-app.
