Title: Boundary-layer transition in the age of data: from a comprehensive
dataset to fine-grained prediction
Authors: Wenhui Chang, Hongyuan Hu, Youcheng Xi, Markus Kloker, Honghui Teng,
Jie Ren
ID: 2507.19120
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.19120

Abstract:
The laminar-to-turbulent transition remains a fundamental and enduring challenge
in fluid mechanics. Its complexity arises from the intrinsic nonlinearity and
extreme sensitivity to external disturbances. This transition is critical in a
wide range of applications, including aerospace, marine engineering, geophysical
flows, and energy systems. While the governing physics can be well described by
the Navier-Stokes equations, practical prediction efforts often fall short due
to the lack of comprehensive models for perturbation initialization and
turbulence generation in numerical simulations. To address the uncertainty
introduced by unforeseeable environmental perturbations, we propose a fine-
grained predictive framework that accurately predicts the transition location.
The framework generates an extensive dataset using nonlinear parabolized
stability equations (NPSE). NPSE simulations are performed over a wide range of
randomly prescribed initial conditions for the generic zero-pressure-gradient
flat-plate boundary-layer flow, resulting in a large dataset that captures the
nonlinear evolution of instability waves across three canonical transition
pathways (Type-K, -H, and -O). From a database of 3000 simulation cases, we
extract diagnostic quantities (e.g., wall pressure signals and skin-friction
coefficients) from each simulation to construct a feature set that links pre-
transition flow characteristics to transition onset locations. Machine learning
models are systematically evaluated, with ensemble methods-particularly XGBoost-
demonstrating exceptional predictive accuracy (mean relative error of
approximately 0.001). Compared to methods currently available (e.g., N-factor,
transitional turbulence model), this approach accounts for the physical process
and achieves transition prediction without relying on any empirical parameters.
