Title: Alignment and Safety in Large Language Models: Safety Mechanisms,
Training Paradigms, and Emerging Challenges
Authors: Haoran Lu, Luyang Fang, Ruidong Zhang, Xinliang Li, Jiazhang Cai,
Huimin Cheng, Lin Tang, Ziyu Liu, Zeliang Sun, Tao Wang, Yingchuan Zhang, Arif
Hassan Zidan, Jinwen Xu, Jincheng Yu, Meizhi Yu, Hanqi Jiang, Xilin Gong, Weidi
Luo, Bolun Sun, Yongkai Chen, Terry Ma, Shushan Wu, Yifan Zhou, Junhao Chen,
Haotian Xiang, Jing Zhang, Afrar Jahin, Wei Ruan, Ke Deng, Yi Pan, Peilong Wang,
Jiahui Li, Zhengliang Liu, Lu Zhang, Lin Zhao, Wei Liu, Dajiang Zhu, Xin Xing,
Fei Dou, Wei Zhang, Chao Huang, Rongjie Liu, Mengrui Zhang, Yiwen Liu, Xiaoxiao
Sun, Qin Lu, Zhen Xiang, Wenxuan Zhong, Tianming Liu, Ping Ma
ID: 2507.19672
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.19672

Abstract:
Due to the remarkable capabilities and growing impact of large language models
(LLMs), they have been deeply integrated into many aspects of society. Thus,
ensuring their alignment with human values and intentions has emerged as a
critical challenge. This survey provides a comprehensive overview of practical
alignment techniques, training protocols, and empirical findings in LLM
alignment. We analyze the development of alignment methods across diverse
paradigms, characterizing the fundamental trade-offs between core alignment
objectives. Our analysis shows that while supervised fine-tuning enables basic
instruction-following, preference-based methods offer more flexibility for
aligning with nuanced human intent. We discuss state-of-the-art techniques,
including Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), Constitutional AI, brain-
inspired methods, and alignment uncertainty quantification (AUQ), highlighting
their approaches to balancing quality and efficiency. We review existing
evaluation frameworks and benchmarking datasets, emphasizing limitations such as
reward misspecification, distributional robustness, and scalable oversight. We
summarize strategies adopted by leading AI labs to illustrate the current state
of practice. We conclude by outlining open problems in oversight, value
pluralism, robustness, and continuous alignment. This survey aims to inform both
researchers and practitioners navigating the evolving landscape of LLM
alignment.
