Title: AdaBrain-Bench: Benchmarking Brain Foundation Models for Brain-Computer
Interface Applications
Authors: Jiamin Wu, Zichen Ren, Junyu Wang, Pengyu Zhu, Yonghao Song, Mianxin
Liu, Qihao Zheng, Lei Bai, Wanli Ouyang, Chunfeng Song
ID: 2507.09882
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.09882

Abstract:
Non-invasive Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCI) offer a safe and accessible means
of connecting the human brain to external devices, with broad applications in
home and clinical settings to enhance human capabilities. However, the high
noise level and limited task-specific data in non-invasive signals constrain
decoding capabilities. Recently, the adoption of self-supervised pre-training is
transforming the landscape of non-invasive BCI research, enabling the
development of brain foundation models to capture generic neural representations
from large-scale unlabeled electroencephalography (EEG) signals with substantial
noises. However, despite these advances, the field currently lacks
comprehensive, practical and extensible benchmarks to assess the utility of the
public foundation models across diverse BCI tasks, hindering their widespread
adoption. To address this challenge, we present AdaBrain-Bench, a large-scale
standardized benchmark to systematically evaluate brain foundation models in
widespread non-invasive BCI tasks. AdaBrain-Bench encompasses a diverse
collection of representative BCI decoding datasets spanning 7 key applications.
It introduces a streamlined task adaptation pipeline integrated with multi-
dimensional evaluation metrics and a set of adaptation tools. The benchmark
delivers an inclusive framework for assessing generalizability of brain
foundation models across key transfer settings, including cross-subject, multi-
subject, and few-shot scenarios. We leverage AdaBrain-Bench to evaluate a suite
of publicly available brain foundation models and offer insights into practices
for selecting appropriate models in various scenarios. We make our benchmark
pipeline available to enable reproducible research and external use, offering a
continuously evolving platform to foster progress toward robust and generalized
neural decoding solutions.
