Title: Topic Modeling and Link-Prediction for Material Property Discovery
Authors: Ryan C. Barron, Maksim E. Eren, Valentin Stanev, Cynthia Matuszek,
Boian S. Alexandrov
ID: 2507.06139
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.06139

Abstract:
Link prediction infers missing or future relations between graph nodes, based on
connection patterns. Scientific literature networks and knowledge graphs are
typically large, sparse, and noisy, and often contain missing links between
entities. We present an AI-driven hierarchical link prediction framework that
integrates matrix factorization to infer hidden associations and steer discovery
in complex material domains. Our method combines Hierarchical Nonnegative Matrix
Factorization (HNMFk) and Boolean matrix factorization (BNMFk) with automatic
model selection, as well as Logistic matrix factorization (LMF), we use to
construct a three-level topic tree from a 46,862-document corpus focused on 73
transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs). These materials are studied in a
variety of physics fields with many current and potential applications.
  An ensemble BNMFk + LMF approach fuses discrete interpretability with
probabilistic scoring. The resulting HNMFk clusters map each material onto
coherent topics like superconductivity, energy storage, and tribology. Also,
missing or weakly connected links are highlight between topics and materials,
suggesting novel hypotheses for cross-disciplinary exploration. We validate our
method by removing publications about superconductivity in well-known
superconductors, and show the model predicts associations with the
superconducting TMD clusters. This shows the method finds hidden connections in
a graph of material to latent topic associations built from scientific
literature, especially useful when examining a diverse corpus of scientific
documents covering the same class of phenomena or materials but originating from
distinct communities and perspectives. The inferred links generating new
hypotheses, produced by our method, are exposed through an interactive Streamlit
dashboard, designed for human-in-the-loop scientific discovery.
