Title: From Turing to Tomorrow: The UK's Approach to AI Regulation
Authors: Oliver Ritchie, Markus Anderljung, Tom Rachman
ID: 2507.03050
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.03050

Abstract:
The UK has pursued a distinctive path in AI regulation: less cautious than the
EU but more willing to address risks than the US, and has emerged as a global
leader in coordinating AI safety efforts. Impressive developments from companies
like London-based DeepMind began to spark concerns in the UK about catastrophic
risks from around 2012, although regulatory discussion at the time focussed on
bias and discrimination. By 2022, these discussions had evolved into a "pro-
innovation" strategy, in which the government directed existing regulators to
take a light-touch approach, governing AI at point of use, but avoided
regulating the technology or infrastructure directly. ChatGPT arrived in late
2022, galvanising concerns that this approach may be insufficient. The UK
responded by establishing an AI Safety Institute to monitor risks and hosting
the first international AI Safety Summit in 2023, but - unlike the EU -
refrained from regulating frontier AI development in addition to its use. A new
government was elected in 2024 which promised to address this gap, but at the
time of writing is yet to do so.
  What should the UK do next? The government faces competing objectives:
harnessing AI for economic growth and better public services while mitigating
risk. In light of these, we propose establishing a flexible, principles-based
regulator to oversee the most advanced AI development, defensive measures
against risks from AI-enabled biological design tools, and argue that more
technical work is needed to understand how to respond to AI-generated
misinformation. We argue for updated legal frameworks on copyright,
discrimination, and AI agents, and that regulators will have a limited but
important role if AI substantially disrupts labour markets.
  If the UK gets AI regulation right, it could demonstrate how democratic
societies can harness AI's benefits while managing its risks.
