Title: Toward the Autonomous AI Doctor: Quantitative Benchmarking of an
Autonomous Agentic AI Versus Board-Certified Clinicians in a Real World Setting
Authors: Hashim Hayat, Maksim Kudrautsau, Evgeniy Makarov, Vlad Melnichenko, Tim
Tsykunou, Piotr Varaksin, Matt Pavelle, Adam Z. Oskowitz
ID: 2507.22902
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.22902

Abstract:
Background: Globally we face a projected shortage of 11 million healthcare
practitioners by 2030, and administrative burden consumes 50% of clinical time.
Artificial intelligence (AI) has the potential to help alleviate these problems.
However, no end-to-end autonomous large language model (LLM)-based AI system has
been rigorously evaluated in real-world clinical practice. In this study, we
evaluated whether a multi-agent LLM-based AI framework can function autonomously
as an AI doctor in a virtual urgent care setting. Methods: We retrospectively
compared the performance of the multi-agent AI system Doctronic and board-
certified clinicians across 500 consecutive urgent-care telehealth encounters.
The primary end points: diagnostic concordance, treatment plan consistency, and
safety metrics, were assessed by blinded LLM-based adjudication and expert human
review. Results: The top diagnosis of Doctronic and clinician matched in 81% of
cases, and the treatment plan aligned in 99.2% of cases. No clinical
hallucinations occurred (e.g., diagnosis or treatment not supported by clinical
findings). In an expert review of discordant cases, AI performance was superior
in 36.1%, and human performance was superior in 9.3%; the diagnoses were
equivalent in the remaining cases. Conclusions: In this first large-scale
validation of an autonomous AI doctor, we demonstrated strong diagnostic and
treatment plan concordance with human clinicians, with AI performance matching
and in some cases exceeding that of practicing clinicians. These findings
indicate that multi-agent AI systems achieve comparable clinical decision-making
to human providers and offer a potential solution to healthcare workforce
shortages.
