Title: AI Space Cortex: An Experimental System for Future Era Space Exploration
Authors: Thomas Touma, Ersin Daş, Erica Tevere, Martin Feather, Ksenia Kolcio,
Maurice Prather, Alberto Candela, Ashish Goel, Erik Kramer, Hari Nayar, Lorraine
Fesq, Joel W. Burdick
ID: 2507.06574
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.06574

Abstract:
Our Robust, Explainable Autonomy for Scientific Icy Moon Operations (REASIMO)
effort contributes to NASA's Concepts for Ocean worlds Life Detection Technology
(COLDTech) program, which explores science platform technologies for ocean
worlds such as Europa and Enceladus. Ocean world missions pose significant
operational challenges. These include long communication lags, limited power,
and lifetime limitations caused by radiation damage and hostile conditions.
Given these operational limitations, onboard autonomy will be vital for future
Ocean world missions. Besides the management of nominal lander operations,
onboard autonomy must react appropriately in the event of anomalies. Traditional
spacecraft rely on a transition into 'safe-mode' in which non-essential
components and subsystems are powered off to preserve safety and maintain
communication with Earth. For a severely time-limited Ocean world mission,
resolutions to these anomalies that can be executed without Earth-in-the-loop
communication and associated delays are paramount for completion of the mission
objectives and science goals. To address these challenges, the REASIMO effort
aims to demonstrate a robust level of AI-assisted autonomy for such missions,
including the ability to detect and recover from anomalies, and to perform
missions based on pre-trained behaviors rather than hard-coded, predetermined
logic like all prior space missions. We developed an AI-assisted, personality-
driven, intelligent framework for control of an Ocean world mission by combining
a mix of advanced technologies. To demonstrate the capabilities of the
framework, we perform tests of autonomous sampling operations on a lander-
manipulator testbed at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, approximating
possible surface conditions such a mission might encounter.
