Title: A collaborative digital twin built on FAIR data and compute
infrastructure
Authors: Thomas M. Deucher, Juan C. Verduzco, Michael Titus, Alejandro Strachan
ID: 2507.00048
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.00048

Abstract:
The integration of machine learning with automated experimentation in self-
driving laboratories (SDL) offers a powerful approach to accelerate discovery
and optimization tasks in science and engineering applications. When supported
by findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR) data infrastructure,
SDLs with overlapping interests can collaborate more effectively. This work
presents a distributed SDL implementation built on nanoHUB services for online
simulation and FAIR data management. In this framework, geographically dispersed
collaborators conducting independent optimization tasks contribute raw
experimental data to a shared central database. These researchers can then
benefit from analysis tools and machine learning models that automatically
update as additional data become available. New data points are submitted
through a simple web interface and automatically processed using a nanoHUB
Sim2L, which extracts derived quantities and indexes all inputs and outputs in a
FAIR data repository called ResultsDB. A separate nanoHUB workflow enables
sequential optimization using active learning, where researchers define the
optimization objective, and machine learning models are trained on-the-fly with
all existing data, guiding the selection of future experiments. Inspired by the
concept of ``frugal twin", the optimization task seeks to find the optimal
recipe to combine food dyes to achieve the desired target color. With easily
accessible and inexpensive materials, researchers and students can set up their
own experiments, share data with collaborators, and explore the combination of
FAIR data, predictive ML models, and sequential optimization. The tools
introduced are generally applicable and can easily be extended to other
optimization problems.
