Title: A Self-Evolving AI Agent System for Climate Science
Authors: Zijie Guo, Jiong Wang, Fenghua Ling, Wangxu Wei, Xiaoyu Yue, Zhe Jiang,
Wanghan Xu, Jing-Jia Luo, Lijing Cheng, Yoo-Geun Ham, Fengfei Song, Pierre
Gentine, Toshio Yamagata, Ben Fei, Wenlong Zhang, Xinyu Gu, Chao Li, Yaqiang
Wang, Tao Chen, Wanli Ouyang, Bowen Zhou, Lei Bai
ID: 2507.17311
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17311

Abstract:
Scientific progress in Earth science depends on integrating data across the
planet's interconnected spheres. However, the accelerating volume and
fragmentation of multi-sphere knowledge and data have surpassed human analytical
capacity. This creates a major bottleneck for discovery, especially in climate
science. To address this challenge, we introduce EarthLink, the first self-
evolving AI agent system designed as an interactive "copilot" for Earth
scientists. Through natural language interaction, EarthLink automates the entire
research workflow by integrating planning, code execution, data analysis, and
physical reasoning into a unified process that directly addresses this
limitation. Beyond efficiency, it exhibits human-like cross-disciplinary
analytical ability and achieves proficiency comparable to a junior researcher in
expert evaluations on core large-scale climate tasks, including model-
observation comparison and climate change understanding. When tasked with an
open scientific problem, specifically the discovery of precursors of the
Atlantic Niño, EarthLink autonomously developed a research strategy, identified
sources of predictability, verified its hypotheses with available data, and
proposed a physically consistent mechanism. These emerging capabilities enable a
new human-AI research paradigm. Scientists can focus on value and result
judgments, while AI systems handle complex data analysis and knowledge
integration. This accelerates the pace and breadth of discovery in Earth
sciences. The system is accessible at our website https://earthlink.intern-
ai.org.cn.
