Title: Perception of Brain-Computer Interface Implantation Surgery for Motor,
Sensory, and Autonomic Restoration in Spinal Cord Injury and Stroke
Authors: Derrick Lin, Tracie Tran, Shravan Thaploo, Jose Gabrielle E. Matias,
Joy E. Pixley, Zoran Nenadic, An H. Do
ID: 2507.11572
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.11572

Abstract:
(Abridged) Stroke and SCI are conditions that can significantly impact the QoL
of survivors in both the physical and psychosocial domains. Both diseases often
result in significant motor and sensory impairments that are not fully
reversible despite current available therapies. Invasive BCIs have emerged as a
promising means to bypass the site of injury and potentially restore motor and
sensory function. However, to maximize the utility and participant satisfaction
with such technology, participants' willingness to embrace BCIs must be
assessed, and placed in context with functional goals and rehabilitative
priorities. Hence, we conducted a survey of a cohort of stroke (n=33), SCI
(n=37), and both (n=1) participants regarding their receptiveness to invasive
ECoG-based BCIs as well as to assess their goals for functional rehabilitation.
Overall, participants indicated a high level of willingness to undergo surgery
to implant ECoG grids for BCI technology if basic motor functions, including
upper extremity, gait, bowel/bladder, and sensory function were restored. There
was no correlation between participant willingness to undergo a prospective BCI
implantation and the level of functional recovery offered by the BCI. Similarly,
there was no correlation between willingness to undergo surgery and the
participants' perceived rehabilitative priorities and level of disability. These
findings indicate that participants were interested in invasive BCI technology
even if only basic functions can be restored, regardless of their level of
disability and their rehabilitative priorities. Such observations imply that
first generation commercial invasive BCIs may not need extensive functions to
garner adoption. Conversely, it also raises a concern that participants from the
stroke and SCI cohort may be overly enthusiastic about such technology, which
poses potential risks for medical exploitation.
