Title: Medical Data Pecking: A Context-Aware Approach for Automated Quality
Evaluation of Structured Medical Data
Authors: Irena Girshovitz, Atai Ambus, Moni Shahar, Ran Gilad-Bachrach
ID: 2507.02628
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.02628

Abstract:
Background: The use of Electronic Health Records (EHRs) for epidemiological
studies and artificial intelligence (AI) training is increasing rapidly. The
reliability of the results depends on the accuracy and completeness of EHR data.
However, EHR data often contain significant quality issues, including
misrepresentations of subpopulations, biases, and systematic errors, as they are
primarily collected for clinical and billing purposes. Existing quality
assessment methods remain insufficient, lacking systematic procedures to assess
data fitness for research.
  Methods: We present the Medical Data Pecking approach, which adapts unit
testing and coverage concepts from software engineering to identify data quality
concerns. We demonstrate our approach using the Medical Data Pecking Tool
(MDPT), which consists of two main components: (1) an automated test generator
that uses large language models and grounding techniques to create a test suite
from data and study descriptions, and (2) a data testing framework that executes
these tests, reporting potential errors and coverage.
  Results: We evaluated MDPT on three datasets: All of Us (AoU), MIMIC-III, and
SyntheticMass, generating 55-73 tests per cohort across four conditions. These
tests correctly identified 20-43 non-aligned or non-conforming data issues. We
present a detailed analysis of the LLM-generated test suites in terms of
reference grounding and value accuracy.
  Conclusion: Our approach incorporates external medical knowledge to enable
context-sensitive data quality testing as part of the data analysis workflow to
improve the validity of its outcomes. Our approach tackles these challenges from
a quality assurance perspective, laying the foundation for further development
such as additional data modalities and improved grounding methods.
