Title: The Cosmological analysis of X-ray cluster surveys VII. Bypassing scaling
relations with Lagrangian Deep Learning and Simulation-based inference
Authors: Nicolas Cerardi, Marguerite Pierre, François Lanusse, Xavier Corap
ID: 2507.01820
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.01820

Abstract:
Galaxy clusters, the pinnacle of structure formation in our universe, are a
powerful cosmological probe. Several approaches have been proposed to express
cluster number counts, but all these methods rely on empirical explicit scaling
relations that link observed properties to the total cluster mass. These scaling
relations are over-parametrised, inducing some degeneracy with cosmology.
Moreover, they do not provide a direct handle on the numerous non-gravitational
phenomena that affect the physics of the intra-cluster medium. We present a
proof-of-concept to model cluster number counts, that bypasses the explicit use
of scaling relations. We rather implement the effect of several astrophysical
processes to describe the cluster properties. We then evaluate the performances
of this modelling for the cosmological inference. We developed an accelerated
machine learning baryonic field-emulator, built upon the Lagrangian Deep
Learning method and trained on the CAMELS simulations. We then created a
pipeline that simulates cluster counts in terms of XMM observable quantities. We
finally compare the performances of our model, with that involving scaling
relations, for the purpose of cosmological inference based on simulations. Our
model correctly reproduces the cluster population from the calibration
simulations at the fiducial parameter values, and allows us to constrain
feedback mechanisms. The cosmological-inference analyses indicate that our
simulation-based model is less degenerate than the approach using scaling
relations. This novel approach to model observed cluster number counts from
simulations opens interesting perspectives for cluster cosmology. It has the
potential to overcome the limitations of the standard approach, provided that
the resolution and the volume of the simulations will allow a most realistic
implementation of the complex phenomena driving cluster evolution.
