Title: Agentic Program Repair from Test Failures at Scale: A Neuro-symbolic
approach with static analysis and test execution feedback
Authors: Chandra Maddila, Adam Tait, Claire Chang, Daniel Cheng, Nauman Ahmad,
Vijayaraghavan Murali, Marshall Roch, Arnaud Avondet, Aaron Meltzer, Victor
Montalvao, Michael Hopko, Chris Waterson, Parth Thakkar, Renuka Fernandez,
Kristian Kristensen, Sivan Barzily, Sherry Chen, Rui Abreu, Nachiappan Nagappan,
Payam Shodjai, Killian Murphy, James Everingham, Aparna Ramani, Peter C. Rigby
ID: 2507.18755
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18755

Abstract:
Aim: With the advent of LLMs, sophisticated agentic program repair has become
viable at large organizations with large codebases. In this work, we develop an
Engineering Agent that fixes the source code based on test failures at scale
across diverse software offerings internally.
  Method: Using Llama as the base, we employ the ReAct harness to develop an
agent. We start with a test failure that was triaged by a rule-based test
failure bot. We then set up an agentic harness and allow the agent to reason and
run a set of 15 actions from reading a file to generating a patch. We provide
feedback to the agent through static analysis and test failures so it can refine
its solution. We leverage an LLM-as-a-Judge to ensure that the patch conforms to
the standards followed by a human review to land fixes.
  Benchmark Findings: We curated offline benchmarks for our patch generator, the
Engineering Agent loop, and the LLM-as-a-Judge. In offline evaluations we found
that a specialized 70B model is highly competitive with the much larger but
vanilla Llama-405B. In an ablation study, we found that the ReAct harness
(neural model) benefited from the symbolic information from static analysis
tools and test execution traces. A model that strikes a balance between the
solve rate and error rate vs the cost and latency has a benchmark solve rate of
42.3% using an average 11.8 feedback iterations.
  Production Findings: In a three month period, 80% of the generated fixes were
reviewed, of which 31.5% were landed (25.5% of the total number of generated
fixes).
  Feedback from Engineers: We used open coding to extract qualitative themes
from engineers' feedback. We saw positive feedback in the form of quick
approvals, gratitude, and surprise. We also found mixed feedback when the
Engineering Agent's solution was partially correct and it served as a good
starting point.
