Title: A Machine Learning Framework for Scattering Kernel Derivation Using
Molecular Dynamics Data in Very Low Earth Orbit
Authors: Miklas Schütte, Stephen Hocker, Hansjörg Lipp, Johannes Roth, Stefanos
Fasoulas, Marcel Pfeiffer
ID: 2507.14143
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.14143

Abstract:
The free molecular flow regime in VLEO makes gas-surface interactions (GSIs)
crucial for satellite aerodynamic modeling. The Direct Simulation Monte Carlo
(DSMC) method is required to estimate aerodynamic forces due to the breakdown of
the continuum assumption. In DSMC, the Maxwell model is the most widely used
approach for GSI. It simplifies the process by treating it as a superposition of
diffuse and specular reflections while assuming a constant accommodation
coefficient. In reality, this coefficient is influenced by multiple factors,
such as the angle and magnitude of the incident velocity. A high-precision GSI
model could significantly improve satellite aerodynamics optimization and the
design of efficient intakes for atmospheric breathing propulsion systems. This
advancement would greatly refine mission planning and fuel requirement
calculations, ultimately extending operational lifetimes and lowering costs. To
gain a deep understanding of the GSI at the microscopic level, molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations provide valuable insights into the physical processes
involved. However, due to computational limitations, simulating an entire
satellite is impractical. Instead, we use MD to analyze the impact of selected
velocity vectors on a amorphous $\text{Al}_2\text{O}_3$ surface. The obtained
scattering kernels for the respective velocity vectors are then used to train a
conditional Variational Autoencoder (cVAE). This model is able to generate
scattering kernels for any incident velocity vector and can be integrated into
DSMC simulations, significantly enhancing their accuracy. Applications of this
model on a flat plate have shown that the cVAE is able to predict the shift from
diffuse to quasi-specular reflection with increasing polar angle. Additionally,
the aerodynamic coefficients and molecular fluxes are considerably different
from those obtained with the Maxwell model.
