Title: Deeply Supervised Multi-Task Autoencoder for Biological Brain Age
estimation using three dimensional T$_1$-weighted magnetic resonance imaging
Authors: Mehreen Kanwal, Yunsik Son
ID: 2508.01565
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.01565

Abstract:
Accurate estimation of biological brain age from three dimensional (3D)
T$_1$-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a critical imaging biomarker
for identifying accelerated aging associated with neurodegenerative diseases.
Effective brain age prediction necessitates training 3D models to leverage
comprehensive insights from volumetric MRI scans, thereby fully capturing
spatial anatomical context. However, optimizing deep 3D models remains
challenging due to problems such as vanishing gradients. Furthermore, brain
structural patterns differ significantly between sexes, which impacts aging
trajectories and vulnerability to neurodegenerative diseases, thereby making sex
classification crucial for enhancing the accuracy and generalizability of
predictive models. To address these challenges, we propose a Deeply Supervised
Multitask Autoencoder (DSMT-AE) framework for brain age estimation. DSMT-AE
employs deep supervision, which involves applying supervisory signals at
intermediate layers during training, to stabilize model optimization, and
multitask learning to enhance feature representation. Specifically, our
framework simultaneously optimizes brain age prediction alongside auxiliary
tasks of sex classification and image reconstruction, thus effectively capturing
anatomical and demographic variability to improve prediction accuracy. We
extensively evaluate DSMT-AE on the Open Brain Health Benchmark (OpenBHB)
dataset, the largest multisite neuroimaging cohort combining ten publicly
available datasets. The results demonstrate that DSMT-AE achieves state-of-the-
art performance and robustness across age and sex subgroups. Additionally, our
ablation study confirms that each proposed component substantially contributes
to the improved predictive accuracy and robustness of the overall architecture.
