Title: SE-Agent: Self-Evolution Trajectory Optimization in Multi-Step Reasoning
with LLM-Based Agents
Authors: Jiaye Lin, Yifu Guo, Yuzhen Han, Sen Hu, Ziyi Ni, Licheng Wang,
Mingguang Chen, Hongzhang Liu, Ronghao Chen, Yangfan He, Daxin Jiang, Binxing
Jiao, Chen Hu, Huacan Wang
ID: 2508.02085
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.02085

Abstract:
Large Language Model (LLM)-based agents have recently shown impressive
capabilities in complex reasoning and tool use via multi-step interactions with
their environments. While these agents have the potential to tackle complicated
tasks, their problem-solving process, i.e., agents' interaction trajectory
leading to task completion, remains underexploited. These trajectories contain
rich feedback that can navigate agents toward the right directions for solving
problems correctly. Although prevailing approaches, such as Monte Carlo Tree
Search (MCTS), can effectively balance exploration and exploitation, they ignore
the interdependence among various trajectories and lack the diversity of search
spaces, which leads to redundant reasoning and suboptimal outcomes. To address
these challenges, we propose SE-Agent, a Self-Evolution framework that enables
Agents to optimize their reasoning processes iteratively. Our approach revisits
and enhances former pilot trajectories through three key operations: revision,
recombination, and refinement. This evolutionary mechanism enables two critical
advantages: (1) it expands the search space beyond local optima by intelligently
exploring diverse solution paths guided by previous trajectories, and (2) it
leverages cross-trajectory inspiration to efficiently enhance performance while
mitigating the impact of suboptimal reasoning paths. Through these mechanisms,
SE-Agent achieves continuous self-evolution that incrementally improves
reasoning quality. We evaluate SE-Agent on SWE-bench Verified to resolve real-
world GitHub issues. Experimental results across five strong LLMs show that
integrating SE-Agent delivers up to 55% relative improvement, achieving state-
of-the-art performance among all open-source agents on SWE-bench Verified. Our
code and demonstration materials are publicly available at
https://github.com/JARVIS-Xs/SE-Agent.
