Title: Case Studies of Generative Machine Learning Models for Dynamical Systems
Authors: Nachiket U. Bapat, Randy C. Paffenroth, Raghvendra V. Cowlagi
ID: 2508.04459
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.04459

Abstract:
Systems like aircraft and spacecraft are expensive to operate in the real world.
The design, validation, and testing for such systems therefore relies on a
combination of mathematical modeling, abundant numerical simulations, and a
relatively small set of real-world experiments. Due to modeling errors,
simplifications, and uncertainties, the data synthesized by simulation models
often does not match data from the system's real-world operation. We consider
the broad research question of whether this model mismatch can be significantly
reduced by generative artificial intelligence models (GAIMs). Unlike text- or
image-processing, where generative models have attained recent successes, GAIM
development for aerospace engineering applications must not only train with
scarce operational data, but their outputs must also satisfy governing equations
based on natural laws, e.g., conservation laws. The scope of this paper
primarily focuses on two case studies of optimally controlled systems that are
commonly understood and employed in aircraft guidance, namely: minimum-time
navigation in a wind field and minimum-exposure navigation in a threat field. We
report GAIMs that are trained with a relatively small set, of the order of a few
hundred, of examples and with underlying governing equations. By focusing on
optimally controlled systems, we formulate training loss functions based on
invariance of the Hamiltonian function along system trajectories. We investigate
three GAIM architectures, namely: the generative adversarial network (GAN) and
two variants of the variational autoencoder (VAE). We provide architectural
details and thorough performance analyses of these models. The main finding is
that our new models, especially the VAE-based models, are able to synthesize
data that satisfy the governing equations and are statistically similar to the
training data despite small volumes of training data.
