Title: Are Companies Taking AI Risks Seriously? A Systematic Analysis of
Companies' AI Risk Disclosures in SEC 10-K forms
Authors: Lucas G. Uberti-Bona Marin, Bram Rijsbosch, Gerasimos Spanakis, Konrad
Kollnig
ID: 2508.19313
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.19313

Abstract:
As Artificial Intelligence becomes increasingly central to corporate strategies,
concerns over its risks are growing too. In response, regulators are pushing for
greater transparency in how companies identify, report and mitigate AI-related
risks. In the US, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) repeatedly warned
companies to provide their investors with more accurate disclosures of AI-
related risks; recent enforcement and litigation against companies' misleading
AI claims reinforce these warnings. In the EU, new laws - like the AI Act and
Digital Services Act - introduced additional rules on AI risk reporting and
mitigation. Given these developments, it is essential to examine if and how
companies report AI-related risks to the public. This study presents the first
large-scale systematic analysis of AI risk disclosures in SEC 10-K filings,
which require public companies to report material risks to their company. We
analyse over 30,000 filings from more than 7,000 companies over the past five
years, combining quantitative and qualitative analysis. Our findings reveal a
sharp increase in the companies that mention AI risk, up from 4% in 2020 to over
43% in the most recent 2024 filings. While legal and competitive AI risks are
the most frequently mentioned, we also find growing attention to societal AI
risks, such as cyberattacks, fraud, and technical limitations of AI systems.
However, many disclosures remain generic or lack details on mitigation
strategies, echoing concerns raised recently by the SEC about the quality of AI-
related risk reporting. To support future research, we publicly release a web-
based tool for easily extracting and analysing keyword-based disclosures across
SEC filings.
