Title: aiXiv: A Next-Generation Open Access Ecosystem for Scientific Discovery
Generated by AI Scientists
Authors: Pengsong Zhang, Xiang Hu, Guowei Huang, Yang Qi, Heng Zhang, Xiuxu Li,
Jiaxing Song, Jiabin Luo, Yijiang Li, Shuo Yin, Chengxiao Dai, Eric Hanchen
Jiang, Xiaoyan Zhou, Zhenfei Yin, Boqin Yuan, Jing Dong, Guinan Su, Guanren
Qiao, Haiming Tang, Anghong Du, Lili Pan, Zhenzhong Lan, Xinyu Liu
ID: 2508.15126
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.15126

Abstract:
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have enabled AI agents to
autonomously generate scientific proposals, conduct experiments, author papers,
and perform peer reviews. Yet this flood of AI-generated research content
collides with a fragmented and largely closed publication ecosystem. Traditional
journals and conferences rely on human peer review, making them difficult to
scale and often reluctant to accept AI-generated research content; existing
preprint servers (e.g. arXiv) lack rigorous quality-control mechanisms.
Consequently, a significant amount of high-quality AI-generated research lacks
appropriate venues for dissemination, hindering its potential to advance
scientific progress. To address these challenges, we introduce aiXiv, a next-
generation open-access platform for human and AI scientists. Its multi-agent
architecture allows research proposals and papers to be submitted, reviewed, and
iteratively refined by both human and AI scientists. It also provides API and
MCP interfaces that enable seamless integration of heterogeneous human and AI
scientists, creating a scalable and extensible ecosystem for autonomous
scientific discovery. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that aiXiv
is a reliable and robust platform that significantly enhances the quality of AI-
generated research proposals and papers after iterative revising and reviewing
on aiXiv. Our work lays the groundwork for a next-generation open-access
ecosystem for AI scientists, accelerating the publication and dissemination of
high-quality AI-generated research content.
  Code: https://github.com/aixiv-org
  aiXiv: https://aixiv.science
