Title: Neural Scaling Laws Surpass Chemical Accuracy for the Many-Electron
Schrödinger Equation
Authors: Du Jiang, Xuelan Wen, Yixiao Chen, Ruichen Li, Weizhong Fu, Hung Q.
Pham, Ji Chen, Di He, William A. Goddard, Liwei Wang, Weiluo Ren
ID: 2508.02570
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.02570

Abstract:
We demonstrate, for the first time, that neural scaling laws can deliver near-
exact solutions to the many-electron Schrödinger equation across a broad range
of realistic molecules. This progress is enabled by the Lookahead Variational
Algorithm (LAVA), an effective optimization scheme that systematically
translates increased model size and computational resources into greatly
improved energy accuracy for neural network wavefunctions. Across all tested
cases, including benzene, the absolute energy error exhibits a systematic power-
law decay with respect to model capacity and computation resources. The
resulting energies not only surpass the 1 kcal/mol "chemical-accuracy" threshold
but also achieve 1 kJ/mol subchemical accuracy. Beyond energies, the scaled-up
neural network also yields better wavefunctions with improved physical
symmetries, alongside accurate electron densities, dipole moments, and other
important properties. Our approach offers a promising way forward to addressing
many long-standing challenges in quantum chemistry. For instance, we improve
energetic properties for systems such as the potential energy curve of nitrogen
dimer as dissociation is approached and the cyclobutadiene automerization
reaction barrier, producing definitive benchmarks, particularly in regimes where
experimental data are sparse or highly uncertain. We also shed light on the
decades-old puzzle of the cyclic ozone stability with highly accurate
calculations for the cyclic-to-open ozone barrier. These results provide near-
exact reference calculations with unprecedented accuracy, universal reliability
and practical applicability, establishing a foundation for AI-driven quantum
chemistry.
