Title: MaLV-OS: Rethinking the Operating System Architecture for Machine
Learning in Virtualized Clouds
Authors: Stella Bitchebe, Oana Balmau
ID: 2508.03676
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.03676

Abstract:
A large body of research has employed Machine Learning (ML) models to develop
learned operating systems (OSes) and kernels. The latter dynamically adapts to
the job load and dynamically adjusts resources (CPU, IO, memory, network
bandwidth) allocation to respond to the actual user demand. What this work has
in common is that it utilizes ML to improve kernel decisions. To this day, and
to the best of our knowledge, no work has taken the opposite direction, i.e.,
using OS to improve ML. While some work proposes applying system-level
optimizations to ML algorithms, they do not tailor the OS to adapt to the ML
context. To address this limitation, we take an orthogonal approach in this
paper by leveraging the OS to enhance the performance of ML models and
algorithms. We explore the path towards an ML-specialized OS, MaLV-OS. MaLV-OS
rethinks the OS architecture to make it specifically tailored to ML workloads,
especially in virtualized clouds, which are now widely used to run ML
applications. MaLV-OS envisioned architecture includes (1) a micro-kernel,
Micro-LAKE, which allows kernel space applications to use the GPU, and (2) an
MLaaS (ML as a Service) subsystem that gathers ML models to help Micro-LAKE with
memory management and CPU scheduling. MaLV-OS architecture also offloads system-
sensitive parts of the models to the OS, to lighten the model complexity and
programming, and speed up its execution. Finally, MaLV-OS integrates an open-
source GPU virtualization software, merged directly into the hypervisor. For
more flexibility, MaLV-OS vision is to enable the virtual machine to dynamically
select MLaaS policies that can improve the performance of the model the user is
running. Because MLaaS is designed as loadable kernel modules, the MaLV-OS
architecture enables the dynamic addition of new capabilities to the MLaaS
subsystem.
