Title: CO Adsorption Sites on Interstellar Water Ices Explored with Machine
Learning Potentials. Binding energy distributions and snowline
Authors: Giulia M. Bovolenta, Germán Molpeceres, Kenji Furuya, Johannes Kästner,
Stefan Vogt-Geisse
ID: 2508.14219
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.14219

Abstract:
Context. Carbon monoxide (CO) is arguably the most important molecule for
interstellar organic chemistry. Its binding to amorphous solid water (ASW) ice
regulates both diffusion and desorption processes. Accurately characterizing the
CO binding energy (BE) is essential for realistic astrochemical modeling.
  Aims. We aim to derive a statistically robust and physically accurate
distribution of CO BEs on ASW surfaces, and to evaluate its implications for
laboratory temperature-programmed desorption experiments and interstellar
chemistry, with a focus on protoplanetary disks.
  Methods. We trained a machine-learned potential (MLP) on 8321 density
functional theory (DFT) energies and gradients of CO interacting with
differently-sized water clusters (22-60 water molecules). The DFT method was
selected after extensive benchmark. With this potential we built realistic non-
porous and porous ASW surfaces, and computed a BE distribution. We used
symmetry-adapted perturbation theory to rationalize the interaction of CO on the
different binding sites.
  Results. We find that both ASW morphologies yield similar Gaussian-like BE
distributions with mean values near 900 K. However, the nature of the binding
interactions is rather different and critically depends on surface roughness and
dangling-OH bonds. Simulated TPD curves reproduce experimental trends across
several coverage regimes. From an astrochemical point of view, the application
of the full BE distribution has a dramatic influence on the CO distribution in
protoplanetary disks, leading to a broader CO snowline region, improving
predictions of CO gas-ice partitioning, and suggesting an equally broader
distribution of organics in these objects.
