Title: BetaWeb: Towards a Blockchain-enabled Trustworthy Agentic Web
Authors: Zihan Guo, Yuanjian Zhou, Chenyi Wang, Linlin You, Minjie Bian, Weinan
Zhang
ID: 2508.13787
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.13787

Abstract:
The rapid development of large language models (LLMs) has significantly
propelled the development of artificial intelligence (AI) agents, which are
increasingly evolving into diverse autonomous entities, advancing the LLM-based
multi-agent systems (LaMAS). However, current agentic ecosystems remain
fragmented and closed. Establishing an interconnected and scalable paradigm for
Agentic AI has become a critical prerequisite. Although Agentic Web proposes an
open architecture to break the ecosystem barriers, its implementation still
faces core challenges such as privacy protection, data management, and value
measurement. Existing centralized or semi-centralized paradigms suffer from
inherent limitations, making them inadequate for supporting large-scale,
heterogeneous, and cross-domain autonomous interactions. To address these
challenges, this paper introduces the blockchain-enabled trustworthy Agentic Web
(BetaWeb). By leveraging the inherent strengths of blockchain, BetaWeb not only
offers a trustworthy and scalable infrastructure for LaMAS but also has the
potential to advance the Web paradigm from Web3 (centered on data ownership)
towards Web3.5, which emphasizes ownership of agent capabilities and the
monetization of intelligence. Beyond a systematic examination of the BetaWeb
framework, this paper presents a five-stage evolutionary roadmap, outlining the
path of LaMAS from passive execution to advanced collaboration and autonomous
governance. We also conduct a comparative analysis of existing products and
discuss key challenges of BetaWeb from multiple perspectives. Ultimately, we
argue that deep integration between blockchain and LaMAS can lay the foundation
for a resilient, trustworthy, and sustainably incentivized digital ecosystem. A
summary of the enabling technologies for each stage is available at
https://github.com/MatZaharia/BetaWeb.
