Title: Explainable AI for Automated User-specific Feedback in Surgical Skill
Acquisition
Authors: Catalina Gomez, Lalithkumar Seenivasan, Xinrui Zou, Jeewoo Yoon, Sirui
Chu, Ariel Leong, Patrick Kramer, Yu-Chun Ku, Jose L. Porras, Alejandro Martin-
Gomez, Masaru Ishii, Mathias Unberath
ID: 2508.02593
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.02593

Abstract:
Traditional surgical skill acquisition relies heavily on expert feedback, yet
direct access is limited by faculty availability and variability in subjective
assessments. While trainees can practice independently, the lack of
personalized, objective, and quantitative feedback reduces the effectiveness of
self-directed learning. Recent advances in computer vision and machine learning
have enabled automated surgical skill assessment, demonstrating the feasibility
of automatic competency evaluation. However, it is unclear whether such
Artificial Intelligence (AI)-driven feedback can contribute to skill
acquisition. Here, we examine the effectiveness of explainable AI
(XAI)-generated feedback in surgical training through a human-AI study. We
create a simulation-based training framework that utilizes XAI to analyze videos
and extract surgical skill proxies related to primitive actions. Our
intervention provides automated, user-specific feedback by comparing trainee
performance to expert benchmarks and highlighting deviations from optimal
execution through understandable proxies for actionable guidance. In a
prospective user study with medical students, we compare the impact of XAI-
guided feedback against traditional video-based coaching on task outcomes,
cognitive load, and trainees' perceptions of AI-assisted learning. Results
showed improved cognitive load and confidence post-intervention. While no
differences emerged between the two feedback types in reducing performance gaps
or practice adjustments, trends in the XAI group revealed desirable effects
where participants more closely mimicked expert practice. This work encourages
the study of explainable AI in surgical education and the development of data-
driven, adaptive feedback mechanisms that could transform learning experiences
and competency assessment.
