Title: EO-1: An Open Unified Embodied Foundation Model for General Robot Control
Authors: Delin Qu, Haoming Song, Qizhi Chen, Zhaoqing Chen, Xianqiang Gao, Dong
Wang, Xinyi Ye, Qi Lv, Modi Shi, Guanghui Ren, Cheng Ruan, Maoqing Yao, Haoran
Yang, Jiacheng Bao, Bin Zhao, Xuelong Li
ID: 2508.21112
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.21112

Abstract:
The human ability to seamlessly perform multimodal reasoning and physical
interaction in the open world is a core goal for general purpose embodied
intelligent systems. Recent vision-language-action (VLA) models, which are co-
trained on large-scale robot and visual-text data, have demonstrated notable
progress in general robot control. However, they still fail to achieve human-
level flexibility in interleaved reasoning and interaction. In this work, we
introduce EO-Robotics, consists of EO-1 model and EO-Data1.5M dataset. EO-1 is a
unified embodied foundation model that achieves superior performance in
multimodal embodied reasoning and robot control through interleaved vision-text-
action pre-training. The development of EO-1 is based on two key pillars: (i) a
unified architecture that processes multimodal inputs indiscriminately (image,
text, video, and action), and (ii) a massive, high-quality multimodal embodied
reasoning dataset, EO-Data1.5M, which contains over 1.5 million samples with
emphasis on interleaved vision-text-action comprehension. EO-1 is trained
through synergies between auto-regressive decoding and flow matching denoising
on EO-Data1.5M, enabling seamless robot action generation and multimodal
embodied reasoning. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of
interleaved vision-text-action learning for open-world understanding and
generalization, validated through a variety of long-horizon, dexterous
manipulation tasks across multiple embodiments. This paper details the
architecture of EO-1, the data construction strategy of EO-Data1.5M, and the
training methodology, offering valuable insights for developing advanced
embodied foundation models. Project Page: https://eo-robotics.ai/eo-1.
