Title: Revealing the Staging Structural Evolution and Li (De)Intercalation
Kinetics in Graphite Anodes via Machine Learning Potential
Authors: Liqi Wang, Xuhe Gong, Zicun Li, Ruijuan Xiao, Hong Li
ID: 2508.06156
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.06156

Abstract:
Revealing the dynamic structural evolution and lithium transport properties
during the charge/discharge processes is crucial for optimizing graphite anodes
in lithium-ion batteries, enabling high stability and fast-charging performance.
However, the dynamic coupling mechanisms among carbon layer kinetics, lithium
(de)intercalation/diffusion, and defects regulation remain insufficiently
understood. In this study, we developed a universal automated workflow based on
machine learning potentials to simulate the dynamic lithium (de)intercalation
process. With this approach, the staging structural evolution of lithium-
graphite intercalation compounds and their lithium transport behavior were
resolved through molecular dynamics simulations. By introducing stacking faults
into the graphite structure, we successfully simulated stage transitions driven
by carbon layer sliding and reorganization, accompanied by stress release and
structural stabilization. The dynamics of carbon layers regulate the lithium
(de)intercalation positional selectivity, producing intermediate states with
varying lithium concentrations and distributions during cycling. This
facilitates the formation and transformation of stage structures while
mitigating residual stress accumulation. A fundamental kinetic asymmetry arises
between lithium intercalation and deintercalation, driven by the continuous and
heterogeneous lithium transport and carbon layer sliding during charge/discharge
processes. The carbon defects regulate lithium transport, in which the atomic-
scale defects confine intralayer lithium transport and carbon sliding while
enabling interlayer transport via dynamic lithium trapping/release mechanisms.
Accordingly, for the future design, it is critical to construct structural units
with controllable carbon layer sliding/reorganization, and tunable defects to
enhance lithium-ion transport.
