Title: Urbanite: A Dataflow-Based Framework for Human-AI Interactive Alignment
in Urban Visual Analytics
Authors: Gustavo Moreira, Leonardo Ferreira, Carolina Veiga, Maryam Hosseini,
Fabio Miranda
ID: 2508.07390
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.07390

Abstract:
With the growing availability of urban data and the increasing complexity of
societal challenges, visual analytics has become essential for deriving insights
into pressing real-world problems. However, analyzing such data is inherently
complex and iterative, requiring expertise across multiple domains. The need to
manage diverse datasets, distill intricate workflows, and integrate various
analytical methods presents a high barrier to entry, especially for researchers
and urban experts who lack proficiency in data management, machine learning, and
visualization. Advancements in large language models offer a promising solution
to lower the barriers to the construction of analytics systems by enabling users
to specify intent rather than define precise computational operations. However,
this shift from explicit operations to intent-based interaction introduces
challenges in ensuring alignment throughout the design and development process.
Without proper mechanisms, gaps can emerge between user intent, system behavior,
and analytical outcomes. To address these challenges, we propose Urbanite, a
framework for human-AI collaboration in urban visual analytics. Urbanite
leverages a dataflow-based model that allows users to specify intent at multiple
scopes, enabling interactive alignment across the specification, process, and
evaluation stages of urban analytics. Based on findings from a survey to uncover
challenges, Urbanite incorporates features to facilitate explainability, multi-
resolution definition of tasks across dataflows, nodes, and parameters, while
supporting the provenance of interactions. We demonstrate Urbanite's
effectiveness through usage scenarios created in collaboration with urban
experts. Urbanite is available at https://urbantk.org/urbanite.
