Title: Beyond Automation: Socratic AI, Epistemic Agency, and the Implications of
the Emergence of Orchestrated Multi-Agent Learning Architectures
Authors: Peer-Benedikt Degen, Igor Asanov
ID: 2508.05116
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.05116

Abstract:
Generative AI is no longer a peripheral tool in higher education. It is rapidly
evolving into a general-purpose infrastructure that reshapes how knowledge is
generated, mediated, and validated. This paper presents findings from a
controlled experiment evaluating a Socratic AI Tutor, a large language model
designed to scaffold student research question development through structured
dialogue grounded in constructivist theory. Conducted with 65 pre-service
teacher students in Germany, the study compares interaction with the Socratic
Tutor to engagement with an uninstructed AI chatbot. Students using the Socratic
Tutor reported significantly greater support for critical, independent, and
reflective thinking, suggesting that dialogic AI can stimulate metacognitive
engagement and challenging recent narratives of de-skilling due to generative AI
usage. These findings serve as a proof of concept for a broader pedagogical
shift: the use of multi-agent systems (MAS) composed of specialised AI agents.
To conceptualise this, we introduce the notion of orchestrated MAS, modular,
pedagogically aligned agent constellations, curated by educators, that support
diverse learning trajectories through differentiated roles and coordinated
interaction. To anchor this shift, we propose an adapted offer-and-use model, in
which students appropriate instructional offers from these agents. Beyond
technical feasibility, we examine system-level implications for higher education
institutions and students, including funding necessities, changes to faculty
roles, curriculars, competencies and assessment practices. We conclude with a
comparative cost-effectiveness analysis highlighting the scalability of such
systems. In sum, this study contributes both empirical evidence and a conceptual
roadmap for hybrid learning ecosystems that embed human-AI co-agency and
pedagogical alignment.
