Title: Exploring Scaling Laws of CTR Model for Online Performance Improvement
Authors: Weijiang Lai, Beihong Jin, Jiongyan Zhang, Yiyuan Zheng, Jian Dong, Jia
Cheng, Jun Lei, Xingxing Wang
ID: 2508.15326
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.15326

Abstract:
CTR models play a vital role in improving user experience and boosting business
revenue in many online personalized services. However, current CTR models
generally encounter bottlenecks in performance improvement. Inspired by the
scaling law phenomenon of LLMs, we propose a new paradigm for improving CTR
predictions: first, constructing a CTR model with accuracy scalable to the model
grade and data size, and then distilling the knowledge implied in this model
into its lightweight model that can serve online users. To put it into practice,
we construct a CTR model named SUAN (Stacked Unified Attention Network). In
SUAN, we propose the UAB as a behavior sequence encoder. A single UAB unifies
the modeling of the sequential and non-sequential features and also measures the
importance of each user behavior feature from multiple perspectives. Stacked
UABs elevate the configuration to a high grade, paving the way for performance
improvement. In order to benefit from the high performance of the high-grade
SUAN and avoid the disadvantage of its long inference time, we modify the SUAN
with sparse self-attention and parallel inference strategies to form LightSUAN,
and then adopt online distillation to train the low-grade LightSUAN, taking a
high-grade SUAN as a teacher. The distilled LightSUAN has superior performance
but the same inference time as the LightSUAN, making it well-suited for online
deployment. Experimental results show that SUAN performs exceptionally well and
holds the scaling laws spanning three orders of magnitude in model grade and
data size, and the distilled LightSUAN outperforms the SUAN configured with one
grade higher. More importantly, the distilled LightSUAN has been integrated into
an online service, increasing the CTR by 2.81% and CPM by 1.69% while keeping
the average inference time acceptable. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/laiweijiang/SUAN.
