Title: Improving watermelon (Citrullus lanatus) disease classification with
generative artificial intelligence (GenAI)-based synthetic and real-field images
via a custom EfficientNetV2-L model
Authors: Nitin Rai, Nathan S. Boyd, Gary E. Vallad, Arnold W. Schumann
ID: 2508.10156
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.10156

Abstract:
The current advancements in generative artificial intelligence (GenAI) models
have paved the way for new possibilities for generating high-resolution
synthetic images, thereby offering a promising alternative to traditional image
acquisition for training computer vision models in agriculture. In the context
of crop disease diagnosis, GenAI models are being used to create synthetic
images of various diseases, potentially facilitating model creation and reducing
the dependency on resource-intensive in-field data collection. However, limited
research has been conducted on evaluating the effectiveness of integrating real
with synthetic images to improve disease classification performance. Therefore,
this study aims to investigate whether combining a limited number of real images
with synthetic images can enhance the prediction accuracy of an EfficientNetV2-L
model for classifying watermelon \textit{(Citrullus lanatus)} diseases. The
training dataset was divided into five treatments: H0 (only real images), H1
(only synthetic images), H2 (1:1 real-to-synthetic), H3 (1:10 real-to-
synthetic), and H4 (H3 + random images to improve variability and model
generalization). All treatments were trained using a custom EfficientNetV2-L
architecture with enhanced fine-tuning and transfer learning techniques. Models
trained on H2, H3, and H4 treatments demonstrated high precision, recall, and
F1-score metrics. Additionally, the weighted F1-score increased from 0.65 (on
H0) to 1.00 (on H3-H4) signifying that the addition of a small number of real
images with a considerable volume of synthetic images improved model performance
and generalizability. Overall, this validates the findings that synthetic images
alone cannot adequately substitute for real images; instead, both must be used
in a hybrid manner to maximize model performance for crop disease
classification.
