Title: Enriching Moral Perspectives on AI: Concepts of Trust amongst Africans
Authors: Lameck Mbangula Amugongo, Nicola J Bidwell, Joseph Mwatukange
ID: 2508.14116
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.14116

Abstract:
The trustworthiness of AI is considered essential to the adoption and
application of AI systems. However, the meaning of trust varies across industry,
research and policy spaces. Studies suggest that professionals who develop and
use AI regard an AI system as trustworthy based on their personal experiences
and social relations at work. Studies about trust in AI and the constructs that
aim to operationalise trust in AI (e.g., consistency, reliability,
explainability and accountability). However, the majority of existing studies
about trust in AI are situated in Western, Educated, Industrialised, Rich and
Democratic (WEIRD) societies. The few studies about trust and AI in Africa do
not include the views of people who develop, study or use AI in their work. In
this study, we surveyed 157 people with professional and/or educational
interests in AI from 25 African countries, to explore how they conceptualised
trust in AI. Most respondents had links with workshops about trust and AI in
Africa in Namibia and Ghana. Respondents' educational background, transnational
mobility, and country of origin influenced their concerns about AI systems.
These factors also affected their levels of distrust in certain AI applications
and their emphasis on specific principles designed to foster trust. Respondents
often expressed that their values are guided by the communities in which they
grew up and emphasised communal relations over individual freedoms. They
described trust in many ways, including applying nuances of Afro-relationalism
to constructs in international discourse, such as reliability and reliance.
Thus, our exploratory study motivates more empirical research about the ways
trust is practically enacted and experienced in African social realities of AI
design, use and governance.
