Title: Beyond Scaling Law: A Data-Efficient Distillation Framework for Reasoning
Authors: Xiaojun Wu, Xiaoguang Jiang, Huiyang Li, Jucai Zhai, Dengfeng Liu,
Qiaobo Hao, Huang Liu, Zhiguo Yang, Ji Xie, Ninglun Gu, Jin Yang, Kailai Zhang,
Yelun Bao, Jun Wang
ID: 2508.09883
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.09883

Abstract:
Large language models (LLMs) demonstrate remarkable reasoning capabilities in
tasks such as algorithmic coding and mathematical problem-solving. Recent
methods have improved reasoning through expanded corpus and multistage training
combining reinforcement learning and supervised fine-tuning. Although some
methods suggest that small but targeted dataset can incentivize reasoning via
only distillation, a reasoning scaling laws is still taking shape, increasing
computational costs. To address this, we propose a data-efficient distillation
framework (DED) that optimizes the Pareto frontier of reasoning distillation.
Inspired by the on-policy learning and diverse roll-out strategies of
reinforcement learning, the key idea of our approach is threefold: (1) We
identify that benchmark scores alone do not determine an effective teacher
model. Through comprehensive comparisons of leading reasoning LLMs, we develop a
method to select an optimal teacher model. (2) While scaling distillation can
enhance reasoning, it often degrades out-of-domain performance. A carefully
curated, smaller corpus achieves a balanced trade-off between in-domain and out-
of-domain capabilities. (3) Diverse reasoning trajectories encourage the student
model to develop robust reasoning skills. We validate our method through
evaluations on mathematical reasoning (AIME 2024/2025, MATH-500) and code
generation (LiveCodeBench), achieving state-of-the-art results with only 0.8k
carefully curated examples, bypassing the need for extensive scaling. Our
systematic analysis demonstrates that DED outperforms existing methods by
considering factors beyond superficial hardness, token length, or teacher model
capability. This work offers a practical and efficient pathway to advanced
reasoning while preserving general capabilities.
