Title: Data-driven Discovery of Digital Twins in Biomedical Research
Authors: Clémence Métayer, Annabelle Ballesta, Julien Martinelli
ID: 2508.21484
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.21484

Abstract:
Recent technological advances have expanded the availability of high-throughput
biological datasets, enabling the reliable design of digital twins of biomedical
systems or patients. Such computational tools represent key reaction networks
driving perturbation or drug response and can guide drug discovery and
personalized therapeutics. Yet, their development still relies on laborious data
integration by the human modeler, so that automated approaches are critically
needed. The success of data-driven system discovery in Physics, rooted in clean
datasets and well-defined governing laws, has fueled interest in applying
similar techniques in Biology, which presents unique challenges. Here, we
reviewed methodologies for automatically inferring digital twins from biological
time series, which mostly involve symbolic or sparse regression. We evaluate
algorithms according to eight biological and methodological challenges,
associated to noisy/incomplete data, multiple conditions, prior knowledge
integration, latent variables, high dimensionality, unobserved variable
derivatives, candidate library design, and uncertainty quantification. Upon
these criteria, sparse regression generally outperformed symbolic regression,
particularly when using Bayesian frameworks. We further highlight the emerging
role of deep learning and large language models, which enable innovative prior
knowledge integration, though the reliability and consistency of such approaches
must be improved. While no single method addresses all challenges, we argue that
progress in learning digital twins will come from hybrid and modular frameworks
combining chemical reaction network-based mechanistic grounding, Bayesian
uncertainty quantification, and the generative and knowledge integration
capacities of deep learning. To support their development, we further propose a
benchmarking framework to evaluate methods across all challenges.
