Title: An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software
Authors: Eser Aygün, Anastasiya Belyaeva, Gheorghe Comanici, Marc Coram, Hao
Cui, Jake Garrison, Renee Johnston Anton Kast, Cory Y. McLean, Peter Norgaard,
Zahra Shamsi, David Smalling, James Thompson, Subhashini Venugopalan, Brian P.
Williams, Chujun He, Sarah Martinson, Martyna Plomecka, Lai Wei, Yuchen Zhou,
Qian-Ze Zhu, Matthew Abraham, Erica Brand, Anna Bulanova, Jeffrey A. Cardille,
Chris Co, Scott Ellsworth, Grace Joseph, Malcolm Kane, Ryan Krueger, Johan
Kartiwa, Dan Liebling, Jan-Matthis Lueckmann, Paul Raccuglia,  Xuefei,  Wang,
Katherine Chou, James Manyika, Yossi Matias, John C. Platt, Lizzie Dorfman,
Shibl Mourad, Michael P. Brenner
ID: 2509.06503
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.06503

Abstract:
The cycle of scientific discovery is frequently bottlenecked by the slow, manual
creation of software to support computational experiments. To address this, we
present an AI system that creates expert-level scientific software whose goal is
to maximize a quality metric. The system uses a Large Language Model (LLM) and
Tree Search (TS) to systematically improve the quality metric and intelligently
navigate the large space of possible solutions. The system achieves expert-level
results when it explores and integrates complex research ideas from external
sources. The effectiveness of tree search is demonstrated across a wide range of
benchmarks. In bioinformatics, it discovered 40 novel methods for single-cell
data analysis that outperformed the top human-developed methods on a public
leaderboard. In epidemiology, it generated 14 models that outperformed the CDC
ensemble and all other individual models for forecasting COVID-19
hospitalizations. Our method also produced state-of-the-art software for
geospatial analysis, neural activity prediction in zebrafish, time series
forecasting and numerical solution of integrals. By devising and implementing
novel solutions to diverse tasks, the system represents a significant step
towards accelerating scientific progress.
