Title: Economic Competition, EU Regulation, and Executive Orders: A Framework
for Discussing AI Policy Implications in CS Courses
Authors: James Weichert, Hoda Eldardiry
ID: 2509.25524
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.25524

Abstract:
The growth and permeation of artificial intelligence (AI) technologies across
society has drawn focus to the ways in which the responsible use of these
technologies can be facilitated through AI governance. Increasingly, large
companies and governments alike have begun to articulate and, in some cases,
enforce governance preferences through AI policy. Yet existing literature
documents an unwieldy heterogeneity in ethical principles for AI governance,
while our own prior research finds that discussions of the implications of AI
policy are not yet present in the computer science (CS) curriculum. In this
context, overlapping jurisdictions and even contradictory policy preferences
across private companies, local, national, and multinational governments create
a complex landscape for AI policy which, we argue, will require AI developers
able adapt to an evolving regulatory environment. Preparing computing students
for the new challenges of an AI-dominated technology industry is therefore a key
priority for the CS curriculum.
  In this discussion paper, we seek to articulate a framework for integrating
discussions on the nascent AI policy landscape into computer science courses. We
begin by summarizing recent AI policy efforts in the United States and European
Union. Subsequently, we propose guiding questions to frame class discussions
around AI policy in technical and non-technical (e.g., ethics) CS courses.
Throughout, we emphasize the connection between normative policy demands and
still-open technical challenges relating to their implementation and enforcement
through code and governance structures. This paper therefore represents a
valuable contribution towards bridging research and discussions across the areas
of AI policy and CS education, underlining the need to prepare AI engineers to
interact with and adapt to societal policy preferences.
