Title: FHRFormer: A Self-supervised Transformer Approach for Fetal Heart Rate
Inpainting and Forecasting
Authors: Kjersti Engan, Neel Kanwal, Anita Yeconia, Ladislaus Blacy, Yuda
Munyaw, Estomih Mduma, Hege Ersdal
ID: 2509.20852
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.20852

Abstract:
Approximately 10\% of newborns require assistance to initiate breathing at
birth, and around 5\% need ventilation support. Fetal heart rate (FHR)
monitoring plays a crucial role in assessing fetal well-being during prenatal
care, enabling the detection of abnormal patterns and supporting timely
obstetric interventions to mitigate fetal risks during labor. Applying
artificial intelligence (AI) methods to analyze large datasets of continuous FHR
monitoring episodes with diverse outcomes may offer novel insights into
predicting the risk of needing breathing assistance or interventions. Recent
advances in wearable FHR monitors have enabled continuous fetal monitoring
without compromising maternal mobility. However, sensor displacement during
maternal movement, as well as changes in fetal or maternal position, often lead
to signal dropouts, resulting in gaps in the recorded FHR data. Such missing
data limits the extraction of meaningful insights and complicates automated (AI-
based) analysis. Traditional approaches to handle missing data, such as simple
interpolation techniques, often fail to preserve the spectral characteristics of
the signals. In this paper, we propose a masked transformer-based autoencoder
approach to reconstruct missing FHR signals by capturing both spatial and
frequency components of the data. The proposed method demonstrates robustness
across varying durations of missing data and can be used for signal inpainting
and forecasting. The proposed approach can be applied retrospectively to
research datasets to support the development of AI-based risk algorithms. In the
future, the proposed method could be integrated into wearable FHR monitoring
devices to achieve earlier and more robust risk detection.
