Title: Human vs. AI Safety Perception? Decoding Human Safety Perception with
Eye-Tracking Systems, Street View Images, and Explainable AI
Authors: Yuhao Kang, Junda Chen, Liu Liu, Kshitij Sharmad, Martina Mazzarello,
Simone Mora, Fabio Duarte, Carlo Ratti
ID: 2509.25457
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.25457

Abstract:
The way residents perceive safety plays an important role in how they use public
spaces. Studies have combined large-scale street view images and advanced
computer vision techniques to measure the perception of safety of urban
environments. Despite their success, such studies have often overlooked the
specific environmental visual factors that draw human attention and trigger
people's feelings of safety perceptions. In this study, we introduce a
computational framework that enriches the existing body of literature on place
perception by using eye-tracking systems with street view images and deep
learning approaches. Eye-tracking systems quantify not only what users are
looking at but also how long they engage with specific environmental elements.
This allows us to explore the nuance of which visual environmental factors
influence human safety perceptions. We conducted our research in Helsingborg,
Sweden, where we recruited volunteers outfitted with eye-tracking systems. They
were asked to indicate which of the two street view images appeared safer. By
examining participants' focus on specific features using Mean Object Ratio in
Highlighted Regions (MoRH) and Mean Object Hue (MoH), we identified key visual
elements that attract human attention when perceiving safe environments. For
instance, certain urban infrastructure and public space features draw more human
attention while the sky is less relevant in influencing safety perceptions.
These insights offer a more human-centered understanding of which urban features
influence human safety perceptions. Furthermore, we compared the real human
attention from eye-tracking systems with attention maps obtained from
eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) results. Several XAI models were
tested, and we observed that XGradCAM and EigenCAM most closely align with human
safety perceptual patterns.
