Title: TPCpp-10M: Simulated proton-proton collisions in a Time Projection
Chamber for AI Foundation Models
Authors: Shuhang Li, Yi Huang, David Park, Xihaier Luo, Haiwang Yu, Yeonju Go,
Christopher Pinkenburg, Yuewei Lin, Shinjae Yoo, Joseph Osborn, Christof Roland,
Jin Huang, Yihui Ren
ID: 2509.05792
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.05792

Abstract:
Scientific foundation models hold great promise for advancing nuclear and
particle physics by improving analysis precision and accelerating discovery.
Yet, progress in this field is often limited by the lack of openly available
large scale datasets, as well as standardized evaluation tasks and metrics.
Furthermore, the specialized knowledge and software typically required to
process particle physics data pose significant barriers to interdisciplinary
collaboration with the broader machine learning community.
  This work introduces a large, openly accessible dataset of 10 million
simulated proton-proton collisions, designed to support self-supervised training
of foundation models. To facilitate ease of use, the dataset is provided in a
common NumPy format. In addition, it includes 70,000 labeled examples spanning
three well defined downstream tasks: track finding, particle identification, and
noise tagging, to enable systematic evaluation of the foundation model's
adaptability.
  The simulated data are generated using the Pythia Monte Carlo event generator
at a center of mass energy of sqrt(s) = 200 GeV and processed with Geant4 to
include realistic detector conditions and signal emulation in the sPHENIX Time
Projection Chamber at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider, located at Brookhaven
National Laboratory.
  This dataset resource establishes a common ground for interdisciplinary
research, enabling machine learning scientists and physicists alike to explore
scaling behaviors, assess transferability, and accelerate progress toward
foundation models in nuclear and high energy physics. The complete simulation
and reconstruction chain is reproducible with the sPHENIX software stack. All
data and code locations are provided under Data Accessibility.
