Title: Leveraging Large Language Models for Robot-Assisted Learning of
Morphological Structures in Preschool Children with Language Vulnerabilities
Authors: Stina Sundstedt, Mattias Wingren, Susanne Hägglund, Daniel Ventus
ID: 2509.22287
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.22287

Abstract:
Preschool children with language vulnerabilities -- such as developmental
language disorders or immigration related language challenges -- often require
support to strengthen their expressive language skills. Based on the principle
of implicit learning, speech-language therapists (SLTs) typically embed target
morphological structures (e.g., third person -s) into everyday interactions or
game-based learning activities. Educators are recommended by SLTs to do the
same. This approach demands precise linguistic knowledge and real-time
production of various morphological forms (e.g., "Daddy wears these when he
drives to work"). The task becomes even more demanding when educators or parent
also must keep children engaged and manage turn-taking in a game-based activity.
In the TalBot project our multiprofessional team have developed an application
in which the Furhat conversational robot plays the word retrieval game "Alias"
with children to improve language skills. Our application currently employs a
large language model (LLM) to manage gameplay, dialogue, affective responses,
and turn-taking. Our next step is to further leverage the capacity of LLMs so
the robot can generate and deliver specific morphological targets during the
game. We hypothesize that a robot could outperform humans at this task. Novel
aspects of this approach are that the robot could ultimately serve as a model
and tutor for both children and professionals and that using LLM capabilities in
this context would support basic communication needs for children with language
vulnerabilities. Our long-term goal is to create a robust LLM-based Robot-
Assisted Language Learning intervention capable of teaching a variety of
morphological structures across different languages.
