Title: Embodied AI: From LLMs to World Models
Authors: Tongtong Feng, Xin Wang, Yu-Gang Jiang, Wenwu Zhu
ID: 2509.20021
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.20021

Abstract:
Embodied Artificial Intelligence (AI) is an intelligent system paradigm for
achieving Artificial General Intelligence (AGI), serving as the cornerstone for
various applications and driving the evolution from cyberspace to physical
systems. Recent breakthroughs in Large Language Models (LLMs) and World Models
(WMs) have drawn significant attention for embodied AI. On the one hand, LLMs
empower embodied AI via semantic reasoning and task decomposition, bringing
high-level natural language instructions and low-level natural language actions
into embodied cognition. On the other hand, WMs empower embodied AI by building
internal representations and future predictions of the external world,
facilitating physical law-compliant embodied interactions. As such, this paper
comprehensively explores the literature in embodied AI from basics to advances,
covering both LLM driven and WM driven works. In particular, we first present
the history, key technologies, key components, and hardware systems of embodied
AI, as well as discuss its development via looking from unimodal to multimodal
angle. We then scrutinize the two burgeoning fields of embodied AI, i.e.,
embodied AI with LLMs/multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) and embodied AI with WMs,
meticulously delineating their indispensable roles in end-to-end embodied
cognition and physical laws-driven embodied interactions. Building upon the
above advances, we further share our insights on the necessity of the joint
MLLM-WM driven embodied AI architecture, shedding light on its profound
significance in enabling complex tasks within physical worlds. In addition, we
examine representative applications of embodied AI, demonstrating its wide
applicability in real-world scenarios. Last but not least, we point out future
research directions of embodied AI that deserve further investigation.
