Title: Enabling 6G Through Multi-Domain Channel Extrapolation: Opportunities and
Challenges of Generative Artificial Intelligence
Authors: Yuan Gao, Zichen Lu, Yifan Wu, Yanliang Jin, Shunqing Zhang, Xiaoli
Chu, Shugong Xu, Cheng-Xiang Wang
ID: 2509.01125
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.01125

Abstract:
Channel extrapolation has attracted wide attention due to its potential to
acquire channel state information (CSI) with high accuracy and minimal overhead.
This is becoming increasingly crucial as the sixth-generation (6G) mobile
networks aim to support complex scenarios, for example, high-mobility
communications utilizing ultra-massive multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO)
technologies and broad spectrum bands, necessitating multi-domain channel
extrapolation. Current research predominantly addresses channel extrapolation
within a single domain, lacking a comprehensive approach to multi-domain channel
extrapolation. To bridge the gap, we propose the concept of multi-domain channel
extrapolation, detailing the essential performance requirements for 6G networks.
These include precise channel extrapolation, adaptability to varying scenarios,
and manageable computational complexity during both training and inference
stages. In light of these requirements, we elaborate the potential and
challenges of incorporating generative artificial intelligence (GAI)-based
models for effective multi-domain channel extrapolation. Given the ability of
the Transformer to capture long-range dependencies and hidden patterns, we
propose a novel Transformer encoder-like model by eliminating the positional
encoding module and replacing the original multi-head attention with a
multilayer perceptron (MLP) for multi-domain channel extrapolation. Simulation
results indicate that this model surpasses existing baseline models in terms of
extrapolation accuracy and inference speed. Ablation studies further demonstrate
the effectiveness of the module design of the proposed design. Finally, we pose
several open questions for the development of practical GAI-based multi-domain
channel extrapolation models, including the issues of explainability,
generalization, and dataset collection.
