Title: PUUMA (Placental patch and whole-Uterus dual-branch U-Mamba-based
Architecture): Functional MRI Prediction of Gestational Age at Birth and Preterm
Risk
Authors: Diego Fajardo-Rojas, Levente Baljer, Jordina Aviles Verdera, Megan
Hall, Daniel Cromb, Mary A. Rutherford, Lisa Story, Emma C. Robinson, Jana
Hutter
ID: 2509.07042
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.07042

Abstract:
Preterm birth is a major cause of mortality and lifelong morbidity in childhood.
Its complex and multifactorial origins limit the effectiveness of current
clinical predictors and impede optimal care. In this study, a dual-branch deep
learning architecture (PUUMA) was developed to predict gestational age (GA) at
birth using T2* fetal MRI data from 295 pregnancies, encompassing a
heterogeneous and imbalanced population. The model integrates both global whole-
uterus and local placental features. Its performance was benchmarked against
linear regression using cervical length measurements obtained by experienced
clinicians from anatomical MRI and other Deep Learning architectures. The GA at
birth predictions were assessed using mean absolute error. Accuracy,
sensitivity, and specificity were used to assess preterm classification. Both
the fully automated MRI-based pipeline and the cervical length regression
achieved comparable mean absolute errors (3 weeks) and good sensitivity (0.67)
for detecting preterm birth, despite pronounced class imbalance in the dataset.
These results provide a proof of concept for automated prediction of GA at birth
from functional MRI, and underscore the value of whole-uterus functional imaging
in identifying at-risk pregnancies. Additionally, we demonstrate that manual,
high-definition cervical length measurements derived from MRI, not currently
routine in clinical practice, offer valuable predictive information. Future work
will focus on expanding the cohort size and incorporating additional organ-
specific imaging to improve generalisability and predictive performance.
