Title: Flexible Morphing Aerial Robot with Inflatable Structure for Perching-
based Human-Robot Interaction
Authors: Ayano Miyamichi, Moju Zhao, Kazuki Sugihara, Junichiro Sugihara,
Masanori Konishi, Kunio Kojima, Kei Okada, Masayuki Inaba
ID: 2509.07496
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.07496

Abstract:
Birds in nature perform perching not only for rest but also for interaction with
human such as the relationship with falconers. Recently, researchers achieve
perching-capable aerial robots as a way to save energy, and deformable structure
demonstrate significant advantages in efficiency of perching and compactness of
configuration. However, ensuring flight stability remains challenging for
deformable aerial robots due to the difficulty of controlling flexible arms.
Furthermore, perching for human interaction requires high compliance along with
safety. Thus, this study aims to develop a deformable aerial robot capable of
perching on humans with high flexibility and grasping ability. To overcome the
challenges of stability of both flight and perching, we propose a hybrid
morphing structure that combines a unilateral flexible arm and a pneumatic
inflatable actuators. This design allows the robot's arms to remain rigid during
flight and soft while perching for more effective grasping. We also develop a
pneumatic control system that optimizes pressure regulation while integrating
shock absorption and adjustable grasping forces, enhancing interaction
capabilities and energy efficiency. Besides, we focus on the structural
characteristics of the unilateral flexible arm and identify sufficient
conditions under which standard quadrotor modeling and control remain effective
in terms of flight stability. Finally, the developed prototype demonstrates the
feasibility of compliant perching maneuvers on humans, as well as the robust
recovery even after arm deformation caused by thrust reductions during flight.
To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first to achieve an aerial robot
capable of perching on humans for interaction.
