Title: Adaptive Quantum Computers: decoding and state preparation
Authors: Niels M. P. Neumann
ID: 2509.08718
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.08718

Abstract:
Interacting with a standard computer can enhance the capabilities of current
quantum computers already today, particularly by offloading certain computations
to the standard computer. Quantum computers that interact with standard
computers to perform computations are called adaptive quantum computers. This
work formalizes a model that describes these adaptive quantum computers. As
quantum computers are still under development, this work focuses on computations
that terminate after a fixed number of steps, as that makes their implementation
likely easier in practice.
  First, we show that adaptive quantum computers are more powerful than standard
computers with respect to the practical problem of retrieving information from
corrupted digital data. Standard computers struggle to retrieve such information
within a fixed number of computation steps. The proof uses a structure-versus-
randomness approach that splits the problem in a structured and a random-like
component. The potential of adaptive quantum computations follows from a
specific example where information is retrieved from corrupted data.
Additionally, adaptive quantum computers can even improve standard computations
for this problem that are not constrained by a fixed number of computation
steps.
  Next, we show how adaptive quantum computations can improve non-adaptive
quantum computations when preparing specific quantum states. We present
efficient adaptive quantum algorithms to prepare the uniform superposition
state, the GHZ state, the W-state and the Dicke state. These states are often
used in other quantum algorithms, so having efficient routines for preparing
them also enhances the efficiency of other algorithms. This work concludes by
comparing these adaptive quantum computations with non-adaptive ones, analyzing
their performance both theoretically and through quantum hardware
implementations.
