Title: Data Scaling Laws for Radiology Foundation Models
Authors: Maximilian Ilse, Harshita Sharma, Anton Schwaighofer, Sam Bond-Taylor,
Fernando Pérez-García, Olesya Melnichenko, Anne-Marie G. Sykes, Kelly K. Horst,
Ashish Khandelwal, Maxwell Reynolds, Maria T. Wetscherek, Noel C. F. Codella,
Javier Alvarez-Valle, Korfiatis Panagiotis, Valentina Salvatelli
ID: 2509.12818
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.12818

Abstract:
Foundation vision encoders such as CLIP and DINOv2, trained on web-scale data,
exhibit strong transfer performance across tasks and datasets. However, medical
imaging foundation models remain constrained by smaller datasets, limiting our
understanding of how data scale and pretraining paradigms affect performance in
this setting. In this work, we systematically study continual pretraining of two
vision encoders, MedImageInsight (MI2) and RAD-DINO representing the two major
encoder paradigms CLIP and DINOv2, on up to 3.5M chest x-rays from a single
institution, holding compute and evaluation protocols constant. We evaluate on
classification (radiology findings, lines and tubes), segmentation (lines and
tubes), and radiology report generation. While prior work has primarily focused
on tasks related to radiology findings, we include lines and tubes tasks to
counterbalance this bias and evaluate a model's ability to extract features that
preserve continuity along elongated structures. Our experiments show that MI2
scales more effectively for finding-related tasks, while RAD-DINO is stronger on
tube-related tasks. Surprisingly, continually pretraining MI2 with both reports
and structured labels using UniCL improves performance, underscoring the value
of structured supervision at scale. We further show that for some tasks, as few
as 30k in-domain samples are sufficient to surpass open-weights foundation
models. These results highlight the utility of center-specific continual
pretraining, enabling medical institutions to derive significant performance
gains by utilizing in-domain data.
