Title: Unlocking Reproducibility: Automating re-Build Process for Open-Source
Software
Authors: Behnaz Hassanshahi, Trong Nhan Mai, Benjamin Selwyn Smith, Nicholas
Allen
ID: 2509.08204
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.08204

Abstract:
Software ecosystems like Maven Central play a crucial role in modern software
supply chains by providing repositories for libraries and build plugins.
However, the separation between binaries and their corresponding source code in
Maven Central presents a significant challenge, particularly when it comes to
linking binaries back to their original build environment. This lack of
transparency poses security risks, as approximately 84% of the top 1200 commonly
used artifacts are not built using a transparent CI/CD pipeline. Consequently,
users must place a significant amount of trust not only in the source code but
also in the environment in which these artifacts are built.
  Rebuilding software artifacts from source provides a robust solution to
improve supply chain security. This approach allows for a deeper review of code,
verification of binary-source equivalence, and control over dependencies.
However, challenges arise due to variations in build environments, such as JDK
versions and build commands, which can lead to build failures. Additionally,
ensuring that all dependencies are rebuilt from source across large and complex
dependency graphs further complicates the process. In this paper, we introduce
an extension to Macaron, an industry-grade open-source supply chain security
framework, to automate the rebuilding of Maven artifacts from source. Our
approach improves upon existing tools, by offering better performance in source
code detection and automating the extraction of build specifications from GitHub
Actions workflows. We also present a comprehensive root cause analysis of build
failures in Java projects and propose a scalable solution to automate the
rebuilding of artifacts, ultimately enhancing security and transparency in the
open-source supply chain.
