Title: Integrated information and predictive processing theories of
consciousness: An adversarial collaborative review
Authors: Andrew W. Corcoran, Andrew M. Haun, Reinder Dorman, Giulio Tononi, Karl
J. Friston, Cyriel M. A. Pennartz,  TWCF,  :, INTREPID Consortium
ID: 2509.00555
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.00555

Abstract:
As neuroscientific theories of consciousness continue to proliferate, the need
to assess their similarities and differences - as well as their predictive and
explanatory power - becomes ever more pressing. Recently, a number of structured
adversarial collaborations have been devised to test the competing predictions
of several candidate theories of consciousness. In this review, we compare and
contrast three theories being investigated in one such adversarial
collaboration: Integrated Information Theory, Neurorepresentationalism, and
Active Inference. We begin by presenting the core claims of each theory, before
comparing them in terms of the phenomena they seek to explain, the sorts of
explanations they avail, and the methodological strategies they endorse. We then
consider some of the inherent challenges of theory-testing, and how adversarial
collaboration addresses some of these difficulties. The stage is then set for
the empirical work to come: first, we outline the key hypotheses to be tested
across a series of multi-site experiments; second, we discuss the kinds of
observations that would support or challenge each theory; third, we consider how
these theories might assimilate or accommodate such observations. Finally, we
show how data harvested across disparate experiments (and their replicates) may
be formally integrated to provide a quantitative measure of the evidential
support accrued under each theory. Besides orienting the reader to the
theoretical foundations of our collaboration, this review aims to provide
valuable meta-scientific insights into the mechanics of adversarial
collaboration and theory-testing in general - including the way theories may be
evaluated in terms of the scientific progress they deliver.
