Title: A Meshing Framework for Digital Twins for Extrusion based Additive
Manufacturing
Authors: Lucas Gallup, Kevin N. Long, Devin J. Roach, William D. Reinholtz, Adam
Cook, Craig M. Hamel
ID: 2509.12436
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.12436

Abstract:
Additive manufacturing (AM) allows for manufacturing of complex three-
dimensional geometries not typically realizable with standard subtractive
manufacturing practices. The internal microstructure of a 3D printed component
can have a significant impact on its mechanical, vibrational, and shock
properties and allows for a richer design space when this is controllable. Due
to the complex interactions of the internal geometry of an extrusion-based AM
component, it is common practice to assume a homogeneous behavior or to perform
characterization testing on the specific toolpath configurations. To avoid
unnecessary testing or material waste, it is necessary to develop an accurate
and consistent numerical simulation framework with relevant boundary value
problems that can handle the complicated geometry of internal material
microstructure present in AM components. Herein, a framework is proposed to
directly create computational meshes suitable for finite element analysis (FEA)
of the fine-scale features generated from extrusion-based AM tool paths to
maintain a strong process-structure-property-performance linkage. This mesh can
be manually or automatically analyzed using standard FEA simulations such as
quasi-static preloading, modal analysis, or thermal analysis. The framework
allows an in-silico assessment of a target AM geometry where fine-scale features
may greatly impact quantities of design interest such as in soft elastomeric
lattices where toolpath infill can greatly influence the self contact of a
structure in compression, which we will use as a motivating exemplar. This
approach greatly reduces the waste of both time and resources consumed through
traditional build and test design cycles for non-intuitive design spaces. It
also further allows for the exploration of toolpath infill to optimize component
properties beyond simple linear properties such as density and stiffness.
