Title: WoW: Towards a World omniscient World model Through Embodied Interaction
Authors: Xiaowei Chi, Peidong Jia, Chun-Kai Fan, Xiaozhu Ju, Weishi Mi, Kevin
Zhang, Zhiyuan Qin, Wanxin Tian, Kuangzhi Ge, Hao Li, Zezhong Qian, Anthony
Chen, Qiang Zhou, Yueru Jia, Jiaming Liu, Yong Dai, Qingpo Wuwu, Chengyu Bai,
Yu-Kai Wang, Ying Li, Lizhang Chen, Yong Bao, Zhiyuan Jiang, Jiacheng Zhu, Kai
Tang, Ruichuan An, Yulin Luo, Qiuxuan Feng, Siyuan Zhou, Chi-min Chan, Chengkai
Hou, Wei Xue, Sirui Han, Yike Guo, Shanghang Zhang, Jian Tang
ID: 2509.22642
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.22642

Abstract:
Humans develop an understanding of intuitive physics through active interaction
with the world. This approach is in stark contrast to current video models, such
as Sora, which rely on passive observation and therefore struggle with grasping
physical causality. This observation leads to our central hypothesis: authentic
physical intuition of the world model must be grounded in extensive, causally
rich interactions with the real world. To test this hypothesis, we present WoW,
a 14-billion-parameter generative world model trained on 2 million robot
interaction trajectories. Our findings reveal that the model's understanding of
physics is a probabilistic distribution of plausible outcomes, leading to
stochastic instabilities and physical hallucinations. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that this emergent capability can be actively constrained toward
physical realism by SOPHIA, where vision-language model agents evaluate the DiT-
generated output and guide its refinement by iteratively evolving the language
instructions. In addition, a co-trained Inverse Dynamics Model translates these
refined plans into executable robotic actions, thus closing the imagination-to-
action loop. We establish WoWBench, a new benchmark focused on physical
consistency and causal reasoning in video, where WoW achieves state-of-the-art
performance in both human and autonomous evaluation, demonstrating strong
ability in physical causality, collision dynamics, and object permanence. Our
work provides systematic evidence that large-scale, real-world interaction is a
cornerstone for developing physical intuition in AI. Models, data, and
benchmarks will be open-sourced.
