Title: MCTED: A Machine-Learning-Ready Dataset for Digital Elevation Model
Generation From Mars Imagery
Authors: Rafał Osadnik, Pablo Gómez, Eleni Bohacek, Rickbir Bahia
ID: 2509.08027
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.08027

Abstract:
This work presents a new dataset for the Martian digital elevation model
prediction task, ready for machine learning applications called MCTED. The
dataset has been generated using a comprehensive pipeline designed to process
high-resolution Mars orthoimage and DEM pairs from Day et al., yielding a
dataset consisting of 80,898 data samples. The source images are data gathered
by the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter using the CTX instrument, providing a very
diverse and comprehensive coverage of the Martian surface. Given the complexity
of the processing pipelines used in large-scale DEMs, there are often artefacts
and missing data points in the original data, for which we developed tools to
solve or mitigate their impact. We divide the processed samples into training
and validation splits, ensuring samples in both splits cover no mutual areas to
avoid data leakage. Every sample in the dataset is represented by the optical
image patch, DEM patch, and two mask patches, indicating values that were
originally missing or were altered by us. This allows future users of the
dataset to handle altered elevation regions as they please. We provide
statistical insights of the generated dataset, including the spatial
distribution of samples, the distributions of elevation values, slopes and more.
Finally, we train a small U-Net architecture on the MCTED dataset and compare
its performance to a monocular depth estimation foundation model,
DepthAnythingV2, on the task of elevation prediction. We find that even a very
small architecture trained on this dataset specifically, beats a zero-shot
performance of a depth estimation foundation model like DepthAnythingV2. We make
the dataset and code used for its generation completely open source in public
repositories.
