Title: Toxicity in Online Platforms and AI Systems: A Survey of Needs,
Challenges, Mitigations, and Future Directions
Authors: Smita Khapre, Melkamu Abay Mersha, Hassan Shakil, Jonali Baruah, Jugal
Kalita
ID: 2509.25539
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.25539

Abstract:
The evolution of digital communication systems and the designs of online
platforms have inadvertently facilitated the subconscious propagation of toxic
behavior. Giving rise to reactive responses to toxic behavior. Toxicity in
online content and Artificial Intelligence Systems has become a serious
challenge to individual and collective well-being around the world. It is more
detrimental to society than we realize. Toxicity, expressed in language, image,
and video, can be interpreted in various ways depending on the context of usage.
Therefore, a comprehensive taxonomy is crucial to detect and mitigate toxicity
in online content, Artificial Intelligence systems, and/or Large Language Models
in a proactive manner. A comprehensive understanding of toxicity is likely to
facilitate the design of practical solutions for toxicity detection and
mitigation. The classification in published literature has focused on only a
limited number of aspects of this very complex issue, with a pattern of reactive
strategies in response to toxicity. This survey attempts to generate a
comprehensive taxonomy of toxicity from various perspectives. It presents a
holistic approach to explain the toxicity by understanding the context and
environment that society is facing in the Artificial Intelligence era. This
survey summarizes the toxicity-related datasets and research on toxicity
detection and mitigation for Large Language Models, social media platforms, and
other online platforms, detailing their attributes in textual mode, focused on
the English language. Finally, we suggest the research gaps in toxicity
mitigation based on datasets, mitigation strategies, Large Language Models,
adaptability, explainability, and evaluation.
