Title: Integrated photonic neuromorphic computing: device, architecture, chip,
algorithm
Authors: Shuiying Xiang, Chengyang Yu, Yizhi Wang, Xintao Zeng, Yuna Zhang,
Dianzhuang Zheng, Xinran Niu, Haowen Zhao, Hanxu Zhou, Yanan Han, Xingxing Guo,
Yahui Zhang, Yue Hao
ID: 2509.01262
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.01262

Abstract:
Artificial intelligence (AI) has experienced explosive growth in recent years.
The large models have been widely applied in various fields, including natural
language processing, image generation, and complex decision-making systems,
revolutionizing technological paradigms across multiple industries.
Nevertheless, the substantial data processing demands during model training and
inference result in the computing power bottleneck. Traditional electronic chips
based on the von Neumann architecture struggle to meet the growing demands for
computing power and power efficiency amid the continuous development of AI.
Photonic neuromorphic computing, an emerging solution in the post-Moore era,
exhibits significant development potential. Leveraging the high-speed and large-
bandwidth characteristics of photons in signal transmission, as well as the low-
power consumption advantages of optical devices, photonic integrated computing
chips have the potential to overcome the memory wall and power wall issues of
electronic chips. In recent years, remarkable advancements have been made in
photonic neuromorphic computing. This article presents a systematic review of
the latest research achievements. It focuses on fundamental principles and novel
neuromorphic photonic devices, such as photonic neurons and photonic synapses.
Additionally, it comprehensively summarizes the network architectures and
photonic integrated neuromorphic chips, as well as the optimization algorithms
of photonic neural networks. In addition, combining with the current status and
challenges of this field, this article conducts an in-depth discussion on the
future development trends of photonic neuromorphic computing in the directions
of device integration, algorithm collaborative optimization, and application
scenario expansion, providing a reference for subsequent research in the field
of photonic neuromorphic computing.
