Title: Observational Tests of Terrestrial Planet Buffering Feedbacks and the
Habitable Zone Concept
Authors: Morgan Underwood, Adrian Lenardic, Johnny Seales, Benjamin Kwait-
Gonchar
ID: 2509.02848
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.02848

Abstract:
The habitable zone is defined as the orbital region around a star where
planetary feedback cycles buffer atmospheric greenhouse gases that, in
combination with solar luminosity, maintain surface temperatures suitable for
liquid water. Evidence supports the existence of buffering feedbacks on Earth,
but whether these same feedbacks are active on other Earth-like planets remains
untested, as does the habitable zone hypothesis. While feedbacks are central to
the habitable zone concept, one does not guarantee the other-i.e., it is
possible that a planet may maintain stable surface conditions at a given solar
luminosity without following the predicted $CO_2$ trend across the entire
habitable zone. Forthcoming exoplanet observations will provide an opportunity
to test both ideas. In anticipation of this and to avoid premature conclusions
based on insufficient data, we develop statistical tests to determine how many
observations are needed to detect and quantify planetary-scale feedbacks. Our
model-agnostic approach assumes only the most generic prediction that holds for
any buffering feedback, allowing the observations to constrain feedback
behavior. That can then inform next-level questions about what specific
physical, chemical, and/or biological feedback processes may be consistent with
observational data. We find that [23, 74](95% CI) observations are required to
detect feedback behavior within a given solar luminosity range, depending on the
sampling order of planets. These results are from tests using conservative error
tolerance-a measure used to capture the risk of false positives. Reducing error
tolerance lowers the chance of false positives but requires more observations;
increasing it reduces the required sample size but raises uncertainty in
estimating population characteristics. We discuss these trade-offs and their
implications for testing the habitable zone hypothesis.
