Title: Scaling Law for Large-Scale Pre-Training Using Chaotic Time Series and
Predictability in Financial Time Series
Authors: Yuki Takemoto
ID: 2509.04921
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.04921

Abstract:
Time series forecasting plays a critical role in decision-making processes
across diverse fields including meteorology, traffic, electricity, economics,
finance, and so on. Especially, predicting returns on financial instruments is a
challenging problem. Some researchers have proposed time series foundation
models applicable to various forecasting tasks. Simultaneously, based on the
recognition that real-world time series exhibit chaotic properties, methods have
been developed to artificially generate synthetic chaotic time series, construct
diverse datasets and train models. In this study, we propose a methodology for
modeling financial time series by generating artificial chaotic time series and
applying resampling techniques to simulate financial time series data, which we
then use as training samples. Increasing the resampling interval to extend
predictive horizons, we conducted large-scale pre-training using 10 billion
training samples for each case. We subsequently created test datasets for
multiple timeframes using actual Bitcoin trade data and performed zero-shot
prediction without re-training the pre-trained model. The results of evaluating
the profitability of a simple trading strategy based on these predictions
demonstrated significant performance improvements over autocorrelation models.
During the large-scale pre-training process, we observed a scaling law-like
phenomenon that we can achieve predictive performance at a certain level with
extended predictive horizons for chaotic time series by increasing the number of
training samples exponentially. If this scaling law proves robust and holds true
across various chaotic models, it suggests the potential to predict near-future
events by investing substantial computational resources. Future research should
focus on further large-scale training and verifying the applicability of this
scaling law to diverse chaotic models.
