Title: Autonomous Data Agents: A New Opportunity for Smart Data
Authors: Yanjie Fu, Dongjie Wang, Wangyang Ying, Xinyuan Wang, Xiangliang Zhang,
Huan Liu, Jian Pei
ID: 2509.18710
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.18710

Abstract:
As data continues to grow in scale and complexity, preparing, transforming, and
analyzing it remains labor-intensive, repetitive, and difficult to scale. Since
data contains knowledge and AI learns knowledge from it, the alignment between
AI and data is essential. However, data is often not structured in ways that are
optimal for AI utilization. Moreover, an important question arises: how much
knowledge can we pack into data through intensive data operations? Autonomous
data agents (DataAgents), which integrate LLM reasoning with task decomposition,
action reasoning and grounding, and tool calling, can autonomously interpret
data task descriptions, decompose tasks into subtasks, reason over actions,
ground actions into python code or tool calling, and execute operations. Unlike
traditional data management and engineering tools, DataAgents dynamically plan
workflows, call powerful tools, and adapt to diverse data tasks at scale. This
report argues that DataAgents represent a paradigm shift toward autonomous data-
to-knowledge systems. DataAgents are capable of handling collection,
integration, preprocessing, selection, transformation, reweighing, augmentation,
reprogramming, repairs, and retrieval. Through these capabilities, DataAgents
transform complex and unstructured data into coherent and actionable knowledge.
We first examine why the convergence of agentic AI and data-to-knowledge systems
has emerged as a critical trend. We then define the concept of DataAgents and
discuss their architectural design, training strategies, as well as the new
skills and capabilities they enable. Finally, we call for concerted efforts to
advance action workflow optimization, establish open datasets and benchmark
ecosystems, safeguard privacy, balance efficiency with scalability, and develop
trustworthy DataAgent guardrails to prevent malicious actions.
