Title: Electronic Fluctuations and Ionic Dynamics in Molten Silver Iodide
Authors: Harender S. Dhattarwal, Richard C. Remsing
ID: 2509.08143
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.08143

Abstract:
Molten salts are high-temperature ionic liquids whose unique combination of
strong Coulombic interactions, large polarizabilities, and high ionic
conductivities makes them central to energy storage, metallurgy, and nuclear
technology. Understanding their delicate balance of Coulomb forces, short-range
repulsion, and electronic polarization, particularly regarding the role that
electronic fluctuations play in their structure and dynamics, is critical to
predictively designing molten salts for applications of interest. We investigate
the importance of electronic fluctuations in molten AgI using density functional
theory, a universal machine learning model (Orb), and a classical, empirical
pairwise model of interionic interactions. We find that directional polarization
fluctuations of iodide ions enhance Ag+ diffusion, manifesting as enhanced force
fluctuations and structure in the time-dependent friction experienced by the
cations. The coupling between iodide polarization fluctuations and silver
diffusion creates a dynamic asymmetry; Ag+ motion is tightly linked to the
instantaneous polarization of neighboring I-, whereas I- dynamics are relatively
unperturbed by electronic fluctuations. For all structural and dynamic
quantities investigated, the Orb model is in excellent agreement with density
functional theory-based simulations, highlighting the ability of this universal
neural network potential to capture many-body polarization effects. In contrast,
the empirical force field fails to reproduce key structural and dynamic
quantities involving cations, ultimately because it neglects dynamic electronic
fluctuations. Our findings connect liquid=state ionic dynamics with the
"electronic paddle-wheel" mechanism of ionic diffusion in superionic solids and
motivate further exploration of polarization fluctuation effects in complex
electrolytes and ionic liquids.
