Title: Increase Alpha: Performance and Risk of an AI-Driven Trading Framework
Authors: Sid Ghatak, Arman Khaledian, Navid Parvini, Nariman Khaledian
ID: 2509.16707
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.16707

Abstract:
There are inefficiencies in financial markets, with unexploited patterns in
price, volume, and cross-sectional relationships. While many approaches use
large-scale transformers, we take a domain-focused path: feed-forward and
recurrent networks with curated features to capture subtle regularities in noisy
financial data. This smaller-footprint design is computationally lean and
reliable under low signal-to-noise, crucial for daily production at scale. At
Increase Alpha, we built a deep-learning framework that maps over 800 U.S.
equities into daily directional signals with minimal computational overhead.
  The purpose of this paper is twofold. First, we outline the general overview
of the predictive model without disclosing its core underlying concepts. Second,
we evaluate its real-time performance through transparent, industry standard
metrics. Forecast accuracy is benchmarked against both naive baselines and macro
indicators. The performance outcomes are summarized via cumulative returns,
annualized Sharpe ratio, and maximum drawdown. The best portfolio combination
using our signals provides a low-risk, continuous stream of returns with a
Sharpe ratio of more than 2.5, maximum drawdown of around 3%, and a near-zero
correlation with the S&P 500 market benchmark. We also compare the model's
performance through different market regimes, such as the recent volatile
movements of the US equity market in the beginning of 2025. Our analysis
showcases the robustness of the model and significantly stable performance
during these volatile periods.
  Collectively, these findings show that market inefficiencies can be
systematically harvested with modest computational overhead if the right
variables are considered. This report will emphasize the potential of
traditional deep learning frameworks for generating an AI-driven edge in the
financial market.
