Title: Assessing the feasibility range of Solar-powered Planetesimals
Redirection operations for Terraforming
Authors: Yegor A. Morozov, Mahdi Yoozbashizadeh, Ahmad Bani Younes, Saeid
Janani, Mikhail Bukhtoyarov, Sergey V. Trifonov, Bryant K. Beeler, Ericson Lopez
ID: 2509.04845
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.04845

Abstract:
The work aims to assess principal physical technical constraints of the key
technological concept for achieving maximal carrying capacity expansive
potential of Planetary Systems. Chemical composition of most potential Biosphere
Substrates is in most cases very far from optimal for full-scale habitability
thus productivity potential realization. To cover all surface of a Biosphere
Substrate with a dense photosynthesising layer during most of remaining
Planetary System lifecycle for achieving maximal carrying capacity thus
workforce productivity enabling further expansion of biosphere to new substrates
importing significant amounts of the limiting chemical elements by planetesimals
redirection is ubiquitously inevitable. Although the price of such operations is
high the value of maximal population productivity of Biosphere Substrates during
the remaining Planetary Systems lifecycle is orders of magnitude higher. The
farther planetesimal is orbiting from a star the more time but less energy is
required for its delivery. The more distant from a star, the more rich in
volatiles planetesimals are. The most technically detailed and feasible scheme
to date of Planetesimals Redirection was proposed in 1993 by Dr. Zubrin based on
NTRs. Nuclear fuel is extremely scarce and might be the principal limiting
factor for final stages of interstellar colonization missions. We investigate
possibilities of using concentrated beamed solar power Planetesimals Redirection
operations for Terraforming as it can increase the possible scale of such
operations to orders of magnitude. Such a mission might consist of Planetesimal
Tug Spacecraft Systems (PTSS) to redirect a planetesimal, and solar Power
Harvesting Beaming System (PHBS) tracking the spacecraft with a beam to power
it. We found Solarpowered Planetesimals Redirection for Terraforming is feasible
within Kuiper Belt with present technologies.
