Title: Human-AI Teaming Co-Learning in Military Operations
Authors: Clara Maathuis, Kasper Cools
ID: 2510.01815
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.01815

Abstract:
In a time of rapidly evolving military threats and increasingly complex
operational environments, the integration of AI into military operations proves
significant advantages. At the same time, this implies various challenges and
risks regarding building and deploying human-AI teaming systems in an effective
and ethical manner. Currently, understanding and coping with them are often
tackled from an external perspective considering the human-AI teaming system as
a collective agent. Nevertheless, zooming into the dynamics involved inside the
system assures dealing with a broader palette of relevant multidimensional
responsibility, safety, and robustness aspects. To this end, this research
proposes the design of a trustworthy co-learning model for human-AI teaming in
military operations that encompasses a continuous and bidirectional exchange of
insights between the human and AI agents as they jointly adapt to evolving
battlefield conditions. It does that by integrating four dimensions. First,
adjustable autonomy for dynamically calibrating the autonomy levels of agents
depending on aspects like mission state, system confidence, and environmental
uncertainty. Second, multi-layered control which accounts continuous oversight,
monitoring of activities, and accountability. Third, bidirectional feedback with
explicit and implicit feedback loops between the agents to assure a proper
communication of reasoning, uncertainties, and learned adaptations that each of
the agents has. And fourth, collaborative decision-making which implies the
generation, evaluation, and proposal of decisions associated with confidence
levels and rationale behind them. The model proposed is accompanied by concrete
exemplifications and recommendations that contribute to further developing
responsible and trustworthy human-AI teaming systems in military operations.
