Title: Multiscale X-ray computed tomography of standard optical fibers
Authors: Maria Caterina Crocco, Flavio Cognigni, Alessia Sanna, Raffaele Filosa,
Svetlana Siprova, Riccardo C. Barberi, Raffaele G. Agostino, Stefan Wabnitz,
Antonio D'Alessandro, Sylvie Lebrun, Marco Rossi, Vincenzo Formoso, Roberto
Termine, Alberto Bravin, Mario Ferraro
ID: 2510.15597
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.15597

Abstract:
Optical fiber technologies enable high-speed communication, medical imaging, and
advanced sensing. Among the techniques for the characterization of optical
fibers, Xray computed tomography has recently emerged as a versatile non-
destructive tool for mapping their refractive index variations in 3D. In this
study, we present a multiscale characterization of standard optical fibers. We
carry out an intercomparison of three tomography setups: classical computed
microtomography, X-ray microscopy, and nanotomography. In each method, our
analysis highlights the trade-offs between resolution, field of view, and
segmentation efficiency. Additionally, we integrate deep learning segmentation
thresholding to improve the image analysis process. Thanks to its large field of
view, microtomography with classical sources is ideal for the analysis of
relatively long fiber spans, where a low spatial resolution is acceptable. The
other way around, nanotomography has the highest spatial resolution, but it is
limited to very small fiber samples, e.g., fiber tapers and nanofibers, which
have diameters of the order of a few microns. Finally, X-ray microscopy provides
a good compromise between the sample size fitting the device's field of view and
the spatial resolution needed for properly imaging the inner features of the
fiber. Specifically, thanks to its practicality in terms of costs and
cumbersomeness, we foresee that the latter will provide the most suitable choice
for the quality control of fiber drawing in real-time, e.g., using the "One-
Minute Tomographies with Fast Acquisition Scanning Technology" developed by
Zeiss. In this regard, the combination of X-ray computed tomography and
artificial intelligence-driven enhancements is poised to revolutionize fiber
characterization, by enabling precise monitoring and adaptive control in fiber
manufacturing.
