Title: Dual-Mind World Models: A General Framework for Learning in Dynamic
Wireless Networks
Authors: Lingyi Wang, Rashed Shelim, Walid Saad, Naren Ramakrishnan
ID: 2510.24546
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.24546

Abstract:
Despite the popularity of reinforcement learning (RL) in wireless networks,
existing approaches that rely on model-free RL (MFRL) and model-based RL (MBRL)
are data inefficient and short-sighted. Such RL-based solutions cannot
generalize to novel network states since they capture only statistical patterns
rather than the underlying physics and logic from wireless data. These
limitations become particularly challenging in complex wireless networks with
high dynamics and long-term planning requirements. To address these limitations,
in this paper, a novel dual-mind world model-based learning framework is
proposed with the goal of optimizing completeness-weighted age of information
(CAoI) in a challenging mmWave V2X scenario. Inspired by cognitive psychology,
the proposed dual-mind world model encompasses a pattern-driven System 1
component and a logic-driven System 2 component to learn dynamics and logic of
the wireless network, and to provide long-term link scheduling over reliable
imagined trajectories. Link scheduling is learned through end-to-end
differentiable imagined trajectories with logical consistency over an extended
horizon rather than relying on wireless data obtained from environment
interactions. Moreover, through imagination rollouts, the proposed world model
can jointly reason network states and plan link scheduling. During intervals
without observations, the proposed method remains capable of making efficient
decisions. Extensive experiments are conducted on a realistic simulator based on
Sionna with real-world physical channel, ray-tracing, and scene objects with
material properties. Simulation results show that the proposed world model
achieves a significant improvement in data efficiency and achieves strong
generalization and adaptation to unseen environments, compared to the state-of-
the-art RL baselines, and the world model approach with only System 1.
