Title: Scalable Vision-Language-Action Model Pretraining for Robotic
Manipulation with Real-Life Human Activity Videos
Authors: Qixiu Li, Yu Deng, Yaobo Liang, Lin Luo, Lei Zhou, Chengtang Yao,
Lingqi Zeng, Zhiyuan Feng, Huizhi Liang, Sicheng Xu, Yizhong Zhang, Xi Chen, Hao
Chen, Lily Sun, Dong Chen, Jiaolong Yang, Baining Guo
ID: 2510.21571
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.21571

Abstract:
This paper presents a novel approach for pretraining robotic manipulation
Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models using a large corpus of unscripted real-life
video recordings of human hand activities. Treating human hand as dexterous
robot end-effector, we show that "in-the-wild" egocentric human videos without
any annotations can be transformed into data formats fully aligned with existing
robotic V-L-A training data in terms of task granularity and labels. This is
achieved by the development of a fully-automated holistic human activity
analysis approach for arbitrary human hand videos. This approach can generate
atomic-level hand activity segments and their language descriptions, each
accompanied with framewise 3D hand motion and camera motion. We process a large
volume of egocentric videos and create a hand-VLA training dataset containing 1M
episodes and 26M frames. This training data covers a wide range of objects and
concepts, dexterous manipulation tasks, and environment variations in real life,
vastly exceeding the coverage of existing robot data. We design a dexterous hand
VLA model architecture and pretrain the model on this dataset. The model
exhibits strong zero-shot capabilities on completely unseen real-world
observations. Additionally, fine-tuning it on a small amount of real robot
action data significantly improves task success rates and generalization to
novel objects in real robotic experiments. We also demonstrate the appealing
scaling behavior of the model's task performance with respect to pretraining
data scale. We believe this work lays a solid foundation for scalable VLA
pretraining, advancing robots toward truly generalizable embodied intelligence.
