Title: A Tutorial on Cognitive Biases in Agentic AI-Driven 6G Autonomous
Networks
Authors: Hatim Chergui, Farhad Rezazadeh, Merouane Debbah, Christos Verikoukis
ID: 2510.19973
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.19973

Abstract:
The path to higher network autonomy in 6G lies beyond the mere optimization of
key performance indicators (KPIs). While KPIs have enabled automation gains
under TM Forum Levels 1--3, they remain numerical abstractions that act only as
proxies for the real essence of communication networks: seamless connectivity,
fairness, adaptability, and resilience. True autonomy requires perceiving and
reasoning over the network environment as it is. Such progress can be achieved
through \emph{agentic AI}, where large language model (LLM)-powered agents
perceive multimodal telemetry, reason with memory, negotiate across domains, and
act via APIs to achieve multi-objective goals. However, deploying such agents
introduces the challenge of cognitive biases inherited from human design, which
can distort reasoning, negotiation, tool use, and actuation. Between
neuroscience and AI, this paper provides a tutorial on a selection of well-known
biases, including their taxonomy, definition, mathematical formulation,
emergence in telecom systems and the commonly impacted agentic components. The
tutorial also presents various mitigation strategies tailored to each type of
bias. The article finally provides two practical use-cases, which tackle the
emergence, impact and mitigation gain of some famous biases in 6G inter-slice
and cross-domain management. In particular, anchor randomization, temporal decay
and inflection bonus techniques are introduced to specifically address
anchoring, temporal and confirmation biases. This avoids that agents stick to
the initial high resource allocation proposal or decisions that are recent
and/or confirming a prior hypothesis. By grounding decisions in a richer and
fairer set of past experiences, the quality and bravery of the agentic
agreements in the second use-case, for instance, are leading to $\times 5$ lower
latency and around $40\%$ higher energy saving.
