Title: Symbol Grounding in Neuro-Symbolic AI: A Gentle Introduction to Reasoning
Shortcuts
Authors: Emanuele Marconato, Samuele Bortolotti, Emile van Krieken, Paolo
Morettin, Elena Umili, Antonio Vergari, Efthymia Tsamoura, Andrea Passerini,
Stefano Teso
ID: 2510.14538
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.14538

Abstract:
Neuro-symbolic (NeSy) AI aims to develop deep neural networks whose predictions
comply with prior knowledge encoding, e.g. safety or structural constraints. As
such, it represents one of the most promising avenues for reliable and
trustworthy AI. The core idea behind NeSy AI is to combine neural and symbolic
steps: neural networks are typically responsible for mapping low-level inputs
into high-level symbolic concepts, while symbolic reasoning infers predictions
compatible with the extracted concepts and the prior knowledge. Despite their
promise, it was recently shown that - whenever the concepts are not supervised
directly - NeSy models can be affected by Reasoning Shortcuts (RSs). That is,
they can achieve high label accuracy by grounding the concepts incorrectly. RSs
can compromise the interpretability of the model's explanations, performance in
out-of-distribution scenarios, and therefore reliability. At the same time, RSs
are difficult to detect and prevent unless concept supervision is available,
which is typically not the case. However, the literature on RSs is scattered,
making it difficult for researchers and practitioners to understand and tackle
this challenging problem. This overview addresses this issue by providing a
gentle introduction to RSs, discussing their causes and consequences in
intuitive terms. It also reviews and elucidates existing theoretical
characterizations of this phenomenon. Finally, it details methods for dealing
with RSs, including mitigation and awareness strategies, and maps their benefits
and limitations. By reformulating advanced material in a digestible form, this
overview aims to provide a unifying perspective on RSs to lower the bar to entry
for tackling them. Ultimately, we hope this overview contributes to the
development of reliable NeSy and trustworthy AI models.
