Title: The Denario project: Deep knowledge AI agents for scientific discovery
Authors: Francisco Villaescusa-Navarro, Boris Bolliet, Pablo Villanueva-Domingo,
Adrian E. Bayer, Aidan Acquah, Chetana Amancharla, Almog Barzilay-Siegal, Pablo
Bermejo, Camille Bilodeau, Pablo Cárdenas Ramírez, Miles Cranmer, Urbano L.
França, ChangHoon Hahn, Yan-Fei Jiang, Raul Jimenez, Jun-Young Lee, Antonio
Lerario, Osman Mamun, Thomas Meier, Anupam A. Ojha, Pavlos Protopapas, Shimanto
Roy, David N. Spergel, Pedro Tarancón-Álvarez, Ujjwal Tiwari, Matteo Viel,
Digvijay Wadekar, Chi Wang, Bonny Y. Wang, Licong Xu, Yossi Yovel, Shuwen Yue,
Wen-Han Zhou, Qiyao Zhu, Jiajun Zou, Íñigo Zubeldia
ID: 2510.26887
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26887

Abstract:
We present Denario, an AI multi-agent system designed to serve as a scientific
research assistant. Denario can perform many different tasks, such as generating
ideas, checking the literature, developing research plans, writing and executing
code, making plots, and drafting and reviewing a scientific paper. The system
has a modular architecture, allowing it to handle specific tasks, such as
generating an idea, or carrying out end-to-end scientific analysis using
Cmbagent as a deep-research backend. In this work, we describe in detail Denario
and its modules, and illustrate its capabilities by presenting multiple AI-
generated papers generated by it in many different scientific disciplines such
as astrophysics, biology, biophysics, biomedical informatics, chemistry,
material science, mathematical physics, medicine, neuroscience and planetary
science. Denario also excels at combining ideas from different disciplines, and
we illustrate this by showing a paper that applies methods from quantum physics
and machine learning to astrophysical data. We report the evaluations performed
on these papers by domain experts, who provided both numerical scores and
review-like feedback. We then highlight the strengths, weaknesses, and
limitations of the current system. Finally, we discuss the ethical implications
of AI-driven research and reflect on how such technology relates to the
philosophy of science. We publicly release the code at
https://github.com/AstroPilot-AI/Denario. A Denario demo can also be run
directly on the web at https://huggingface.co/spaces/astropilot-ai/Denario, and
the full app will be deployed on the cloud.
