Title: Very High Precision Astrometry for Exoplanets and Dark Matter with the
Habitable Worlds Observatory
Authors: Fabien Malbet, J. Amiaux, F. Ardellier-Desages, E. Doumayrou, P. -A.
Frugier, R. Goullioud, T. Greene, L. Labadie, P. -O. Lagage, M. Lizzana, A.
Léger, T. Lépine, G. Mamon, J. Martignac, F. Pancher, T. Pichon, A. Roberge, S.
Ronayette, H. Rousset, S. Soler, A. Sozzetti, T. Tourette
ID: 2510.18920
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.18920

Abstract:
Astrometry, one of the oldest branches of astronomy, has been revolutionized by
missions like Hipparcos and especially Gaia, which mapped billions of stars with
extraordinary precision. However, challenges such as detecting Earth-like
exoplanets in nearby habitable zones and probing the influence of dark matter in
galactic environments require sub-microarcsecond accuracy. With a 6--8 meter
large-aperture telescope operating across at visible wavelengths, the Habitable
Worlds Observatory by NASA can combine astrometry and direct imaging to detect
rocky exoplanets within 10 parsecs and study their atmospheres. We consider here
the scientific requirements and present a concept for a dedicated astrometric
instrument on HWO. It is capable to produce diffraction-limited images of large
fields, achieving a point-spread function (PSF) precision of 20 milliarcseconds.
Equipped with a detector calibration system, HWO can perform high precision
astrometry, and, detect and measure the orbit of Earth-mass planets in the
habitable zone of Nearby Solar-type stars. HWO can dramatically improve current
constraints on the self- interaction cross-section of heavy dark matter
particles (WIMPs) and on the masses of ultra-high dark matter particles, through
the study of stellar motions in galactic environments. The visible channel of
the instrument features a large CMOS-based focal plane with stitched pixel
arrays, enabling a large field of view. The ``Detector Calibration Unit'' system
uses interferometric laser fringes to calibrate pixel positions. Using
differential astrometry and pointed observations with a stable telescope design
enables extended integration times, enhancing sensitivity to sub-microarcsecond
precision for detecting exoplanets and studying dark matter through stellar
motion.
