Title: Foundation Models for Astrobiology: Paper I -- Workshop and Overview
Authors: Ryan Felton, Caleb Scharf, Stuart Bartlett, Nathalie A. Cabrol,
Victoria Da Poian, Diana Gentry, Jian Gong, Adrienne Hoarfrost, Manil Maskey,
Floyd Nichols, Conor A. Nixon, Tejas Panambur, Joseph Pasterski, Anton S.
Petrov, Anirudh Prabhu, Brenda Thomson, Hamed Valizadegan, Kimberley Warren-
Rhodes, David Wettergreen, Michael L. Wong, Anastasia Yanchilina
ID: 2510.08636
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.08636

Abstract:
Advances in machine learning over the past decade have resulted in a
proliferation of algorithmic applications for encoding, characterizing, and
acting on complex data that may contain many high dimensional features.
Recently, the emergence of deep-learning models trained across very large
datasets has created a new paradigm for machine learning in the form of
Foundation Models. Foundation Models are programs trained on very large and
broad datasets with an extensive number of parameters. Once built, these
powerful, and flexible, models can be utilized in less resource-intensive ways
to build many different, downstream applications that can integrate previously
disparate, multimodal data. The development of these applications can be done
rapidly and with a much lower demand for machine learning expertise. And the
necessary infrastructure and models themselves are already being established
within agencies such as NASA and ESA. At NASA this work is across several
divisions of the Science Mission Directorate including the NASA Goddard and
INDUS Large Language Models and the Prithvi Geospatial Foundation Model. And ESA
initiatives to bring Foundation Models to Earth observations has led to the
development of TerraMind. A workshop was held by the NASA Ames Research Center
and the SETI Institute, in February 2025, to investigate the potential of
Foundation Models for astrobiological research and to determine what steps would
be needed to build and utilize such a model or models. This paper shares the
findings and recommendations of that workshop, and describes clear near-term,
and future opportunities in the development of a Foundation Model (or Models)
for astrobiology applications. These applications would include a biosignature,
or life characterization, task, a mission development and operations task, and a
natural language task for integrating and supporting astrobiology research
needs.
