Title: Foundation Models for Discovery and Exploration in Chemical Space
Authors: Alexius Wadell, Anoushka Bhutani, Victor Azumah, Austin R. Ellis-Mohr,
Celia Kelly, Hancheng Zhao, Anuj K. Nayak, Kareem Hegazy, Alexander Brace,
Hongyi Lin, Murali Emani, Venkatram Vishwanath, Kevin Gering, Melisa Alkan, Tom
Gibbs, Jack Wells, Lav R. Varshney, Bharath Ramsundar, Karthik Duraisamy,
Michael W. Mahoney, Arvind Ramanathan, Venkatasubramanian Viswanathan
ID: 2510.18900
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.18900

Abstract:
Accurate prediction of atomistic, thermodynamic, and kinetic properties from
molecular structures underpins materials innovation. Existing computational and
experimental approaches lack the scalability required to efficiently navigate
chemical space. Scientific foundation models trained on large unlabeled datasets
offer a path toward exploring chemical space across diverse application domains.
Here we develop MIST, a family of molecular foundation models with up to an
order of magnitude more parameters and data than prior works. Trained using a
novel tokenization scheme that comprehensively captures nuclear, electronic, and
geometric information, MIST learns from a diverse range of molecules. MIST
models have been fine-tuned to predict more than 400 structure -- property
relationships and match or exceed state-of-the-art performance across benchmarks
spanning physiology, electrochemistry, and quantum chemistry. We demonstrate the
ability of these models to solve real-world problems across chemical space,
including multiobjective electrolyte solvent screening, olfactory perception
mapping, isotope half-life prediction, stereochemical reasoning for chiral
organometallic compounds, and binary and multi-component mixture property
prediction. Probing MIST models using mechanistic interpretability methods
reveals identifiable patterns and trends not explicitly present in the training
data, suggesting that the models learn generalizable scientific concepts. We
formulate hyperparameter-penalized Bayesian neural scaling laws and use them to
reduce the computational cost of model development by an order of magnitude. The
methods and findings presented here represent a significant step toward
accelerating materials discovery, design, and optimization using foundation
models and provide valuable guidance for training compute-optimal scientific
foundation models.
