Title: Can World Models Benefit VLMs for World Dynamics?
Authors: Kevin Zhang, Kuangzhi Ge, Xiaowei Chi, Renrui Zhang, Shaojun Shi, Zhen
Dong, Sirui Han, Shanghang Zhang
ID: 2510.00855
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.00855

Abstract:
Trained on internet-scale video data, generative world models are increasingly
recognized as powerful world simulators that can generate consistent and
plausible dynamics over structure, motion, and physics. This raises a natural
question: with the advent of strong video foundational models, might they
supplant conventional vision encoder paradigms for general-purpose multimodal
understanding? While recent studies have begun to explore the potential of world
models on common vision tasks, these explorations typically lack a systematic
investigation of generic, multimodal tasks. In this work, we strive to
investigate the capabilities when world model priors are transferred into
Vision-Language Models: we re-purpose a video diffusion model as a generative
encoder to perform a single denoising step and treat the resulting latents as a
set of visual embedding. We empirically investigate this class of models, which
we refer to as World-Language Models (WorldLMs), and we find that generative
encoders can capture latents useful for downstream understanding that show
distinctions from conventional encoders. Naming our best-performing variant
Dynamic Vision Aligner (DyVA), we further discover that this method
significantly enhances spatial reasoning abilities and enables single-image
models to perform multi-frame reasoning. Through the curation of a suite of
visual reasoning tasks, we find DyVA to surpass both open-source and proprietary
baselines, achieving state-of-the-art or comparable performance. We attribute
these gains to WorldLM's inherited motion-consistency internalization from video
pre-training. Finally, we systematically explore extensive model designs to
highlight promising directions for future work. We hope our study can pave the
way for a new family of VLMs that leverage priors from world models and are on a
promising path towards generalist vision learners.
