Title: Self-evolving expertise in complex non-verifiable subject domains:
dialogue as implicit meta-RL
Authors: Richard M. Bailey
ID: 2510.15772
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.15772

Abstract:
So-called `wicked problems', those involving complex multi-dimensional settings,
non-verifiable outcomes, heterogeneous impacts and a lack of single objectively
correct answers, have plagued humans throughout history. Modern examples include
decisions over justice frameworks, solving environmental pollution, planning for
pandemic resilience and food security. The use of state-of-the-art artificial
intelligence systems (notably Large Language Model-based agents) collaborating
with humans on solving such problems is being actively explored. While the
abilities of LLMs can be improved by, for example, fine-tuning, hand-crafted
system prompts and scaffolding with external tools, LLMs lack endogenous
mechanisms to develop expertise through experience in such settings. This work
address this gap with Dialectica, a framework where agents engage in structured
dialogue on defined topics, augmented by memory, self-reflection, and policy-
constrained context editing. Formally, discussion is viewed as an implicit meta-
reinforcement learning process. The `dialogue-trained' agents are evaluated
post-hoc using judged pairwise comparisons of elicited responses. Across two
model architectures (locally run Qwen3:30b and OpenAI's o4-mini) results show
that enabling reflection-based context editing during discussion produces agents
which dominate their baseline counterparts on Elo scores, normalized Bradley-
Terry-Davidson ability, and AlphaRank mass. The predicted signatures of learning
are observed qualitatively in statement and reflection logs, where reflections
identify weaknesses and reliably shape subsequent statements. Agreement between
quantitative and qualitative evidence supports dialogue-driven context evolution
as a practical path to targeted expertise amplification in open non-verifiable
domains.
