Title: Agentsway -- Software Development Methodology for AI Agents-based Teams
Authors: Eranga Bandara, Ross Gore, Xueping Liang, Sachini Rajapakse, Isurunima
Kularathne, Pramoda Karunarathna, Peter Foytik, Sachin Shetty, Ravi Mukkamala,
Abdul Rahman, Amin Hass, Ng Wee Keong, Kasun De Zoysa, Aruna Withanage, Nilaan
Loganathan
ID: 2510.23664
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.23664

Abstract:
The emergence of Agentic AI is fundamentally transforming how software is
designed, developed, and maintained. Traditional software development
methodologies such as Agile, Kanban, ShapeUp, etc, were originally designed for
human-centric teams and are increasingly inadequate in environments where
autonomous AI agents contribute to planning, coding, testing, and continuous
learning. To address this methodological gap, we present "Agentsway" a novel
software development framework designed for ecosystems where AI agents operate
as first-class collaborators. Agentsway introduces a structured lifecycle
centered on human orchestration, and privacy-preserving collaboration among
specialized AI agents. The framework defines distinct roles for planning,
prompting, coding, testing, and fine-tuning agents, each contributing to
iterative improvement and adaptive learning throughout the development process.
By integrating fine-tuned LLMs that leverage outputs and feedback from different
agents throughout the development cycle as part of a retrospective learning
process, Agentsway enhances domain-specific reasoning, and explainable decision-
making across the entire software development lifecycle. Responsible AI
principles are further embedded across the agents through the coordinated use of
multiple fine-tuned LLMs and advanced reasoning models, ensuring balanced,
transparent, and accountable decision-making. This work advances software
engineering by formalizing agent-centric collaboration, integrating privacy-by-
design principles, and defining measurable metrics for productivity and trust.
Agentsway represents a foundational step toward the next generation of AI-
native, self-improving software development methodologies. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first research effort to introduce a dedicated
methodology explicitly designed for AI agent-based software engineering teams.
