Title: Emergence of Internal State-Modulated Swarming in Multi-Agent Patch
Foraging System
Authors: Siddharth Chaturvedi, Ahmed EL-Gazzar, Marcel van Gerven
ID: 2510.18886
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.18886

Abstract:
Active particles are entities that sustain persistent out-of-equilibrium motion
by consuming energy. Under certain conditions, they exhibit the tendency to
self-organize through coordinated movements, such as swarming via aggregation.
While performing non-cooperative foraging tasks, the emergence of such swarming
behavior in foragers, exemplifying active particles, has been attributed to the
partial observability of the environment, in which the presence of another
forager can serve as a proxy signal to indicate the potential presence of a food
source or a resource patch. In this paper, we validate this phenomenon by
simulating multiple self-propelled foragers as they forage from multiple
resource patches in a non-cooperative manner. These foragers operate in a
continuous two-dimensional space with stochastic position updates and partial
observability. We evolve a shared policy in the form of a continuous-time
recurrent neural network that serves as a velocity controller for the foragers.
To this end, we use an evolutionary strategy algorithm wherein the different
samples of the policy-distribution are evaluated in the same rollout. Then we
show that agents are able to learn to adaptively forage in the environment.
Next, we show the emergence of swarming in the form of aggregation among the
foragers when resource patches are absent. We observe that the strength of this
swarming behavior appears to be inversely proportional to the amount of resource
stored in the foragers, which supports the risk-sensitive foraging claims.
Empirical analysis of the learned controller's hidden states in minimal test
runs uncovers their sensitivity to the amount of resource stored in a forager.
Clamping these hidden states to represent a lesser amount of resource hastens
its learned aggregation behavior.
