Title: Overlap-aware segmentation for topological reconstruction of obscured
objects
Authors: J. Schueler, H. M. Araújo, S. N. Balashov, J. E. Borg, C. Brew, F. M.
Brunbauer, C. Cazzaniga, A. Cottle, D. Edgeman, C. D. Frost, F. Garcia, D. Hunt,
M. Kastriotou, P. Knights, H. Kraus, A. Lindote, M. Lisowska, D. Loomba, E.
Lopez Asamar, P. A. Majewski, T. Marley, C. McCabe, L. Millins, R. Nandakumar,
T. Neep, F. Neves, K. Nikolopoulos, E. Oliveri, A. Roy, T. J. Sumner, E. Tilly,
W. Thompson, M. A. Vogiatzi
ID: 2510.06194
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.06194

Abstract:
The separation of overlapping objects presents a significant challenge in
scientific imaging. While deep learning segmentation-regression algorithms can
predict pixel-wise intensities, they typically treat all regions equally rather
than prioritizing overlap regions where attribution is most ambiguous. Recent
advances in instance segmentation show that weighting regions of pixel overlap
in training can improve segmentation boundary predictions in regions of overlap,
but this idea has not yet been extended to segmentation regression. We address
this with Overlap-Aware Segmentation of ImageS (OASIS): a new segmentation-
regression framework with a weighted loss function designed to prioritize
regions of object-overlap during training, enabling extraction of pixel
intensities and topological features from heavily obscured objects. We
demonstrate OASIS in the context of the MIGDAL experiment, which aims to
directly image the Migdal effect--a rare process where electron emission is
induced by nuclear scattering--in a low-pressure optical time projection
chamber. This setting poses an extreme test case, as the target for
reconstruction is a faint electron recoil track which is often heavily-buried
within the orders-of-magnitude brighter nuclear recoil track. Compared to
unweighted training, OASIS improves median intensity reconstruction errors from
-32% to -14% for low-energy electron tracks (4-5 keV) and improves topological
intersection-over-union scores from 0.828 to 0.855. These performance gains
demonstrate OASIS's ability to recover obscured signals in overlap-dominated
regions. The framework provides a generalizable methodology for scientific
imaging where pixels represent physical quantities and overlap obscures features
of interest. All code is openly available to facilitate cross-domain adoption.
