Title: Towards Smart Manufacturing Metaverse via Digital Twinning in Extended
Reality
Authors: Hui Yang, Faisal Aqlan, Richard Zhao
ID: 2510.16280
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16280

Abstract:
The rapid evolution of modern manufacturing systems is driven by the integration
of emerging metaverse technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI), digital
twin (DT) with different forms of extended reality (XR) like virtual reality
(VR), augmented reality (AR), and mixed reality (MR). These advances confront
manufacturing workers with complex and evolving environments that demand digital
literacy for problem solving in the future workplace. However, manufacturing
industry faces a critical shortage of skilled workforce with digital literacy in
the world. Further, global pandemic has significantly changed how people work
and collaborate digitally and remotely. There is an urgent need to rethink
digital platformization and leverage emerging technologies to propel industrial
evolution toward human-centered manufacturing metaverse (MfgVerse). This paper
presents a forward-looking perspective on the development of smart MfgVerse,
highlighting current efforts in learning factory, cognitive digital twinning,
and the new sharing economy of manufacturing-as-a-service (MaaS). MfgVerse is
converging into multiplex networks, including a social network of human
stakeholders, an interconnected network of manufacturing things or agents (e.g.,
machines, robots, facilities, material handling systems), a network of digital
twins of physical things, as well as auxiliary networks of sales, supply chain,
logistics, and remanufacturing systems. We also showcase the design and
development of a learning factory for workforce training in extended reality.
Finally, future directions, challenges, and opportunities are discussed for
human-centered manufacturing metaverse. We hope this work helps stimulate more
comprehensive studies and in-depth research efforts to advance MfgVerse
technologies.
