Title: Evaluating Fitness Averaging Strategies in Cooperative NeuroCoEvolution
for Automated Soft Actuator Design
Authors: Hugo Alcaraz-Herrera, Michail-Antisthenis Tsompanas, Igor Balaz, Andrew
Adamatzky
ID: 2510.24510
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.24510

Abstract:
Soft robotics are increasingly favoured in specific applications such as
healthcare, due to their adaptability, which stems from the non-linear
properties of their building materials. However, these properties also pose
significant challenges in designing the morphologies and controllers of soft
robots. The relatively short history of this field has not yet produced
sufficient knowledge to consistently derive optimal solutions. Consequently, an
automated process for the design of soft robot morphologies can be extremely
helpful. This study focusses on the cooperative NeuroCoEvolution of networks
that are indirect representations of soft robot actuators. Both the morphologies
and controllers represented by Compositional Pattern Producing Networks are
evolved using the well-established method NeuroEvolution of Augmented Topologies
(CPPN-NEAT). The CoEvolution of controllers and morphologies is implemented
using the top n individuals from the cooperating population, with various
averaging methods tested to determine the fitness of the evaluated individuals.
The test-case application for this research is the optimisation of a soft
actuator for a drug delivery system. The primary metric used is the maximum
displacement of one end of the actuator in a specified direction. Additionally,
the robustness of the evolved morphologies is assessed against a range of
randomly generated controllers to simulate potential noise in real-world
applications. The results of this investigation indicate that CPPN-NEAT produces
superior morphologies compared to previously published results from multi-
objective optimisation, with reduced computational effort and time. Moreover,
the best configuration is found to be CoEvolution with the two best individuals
from the cooperative population and the averaging of their fitness using the
weighted mean method.
