Title: A Standardized Benchmark for Machine-Learned Molecular Dynamics using
Weighted Ensemble Sampling
Authors: Alexander Aghili, Andy Bruce, Daniel Sabo, Sanya Murdeshwar, Kevin
Bachelor, Ionut Mistreanu, Ashwin Lokapally, Razvan Marinescu
ID: 2510.17187
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.17187

Abstract:
The rapid evolution of molecular dynamics (MD) methods, including machine-
learned dynamics, has outpaced the development of standardized tools for method
validation. Objective comparison between simulation approaches is often hindered
by inconsistent evaluation metrics, insufficient sampling of rare conformational
states, and the absence of reproducible benchmarks. To address these challenges,
we introduce a modular benchmarking framework that systematically evaluates
protein MD methods using enhanced sampling analysis. Our approach uses weighted
ensemble (WE) sampling via The Weighted Ensemble Simulation Toolkit with
Parallelization and Analysis (WESTPA), based on progress coordinates derived
from Time-lagged Independent Component Analysis (TICA), enabling fast and
efficient exploration of protein conformational space. The framework includes a
flexible, lightweight propagator interface that supports arbitrary simulation
engines, allowing both classical force fields and machine learning-based models.
Additionally, the framework offers a comprehensive evaluation suite capable of
computing more than 19 different metrics and visualizations across a variety of
domains. We further contribute a dataset of nine diverse proteins, ranging from
10 to 224 residues, that span a variety of folding complexities and topologies.
Each protein has been extensively simulated at 300K for one million MD steps per
starting point (4 ns). To demonstrate the utility of our framework, we perform
validation tests using classic MD simulations with implicit solvent and compare
protein conformational sampling using a fully trained versus under-trained
CGSchNet model. By standardizing evaluation protocols and enabling direct,
reproducible comparisons across MD approaches, our open-source platform lays the
groundwork for consistent, rigorous benchmarking across the molecular simulation
community.
