Title: Generative AI for Biosciences: Emerging Threats and Roadmap to
Biosecurity
Authors: Zaixi Zhang, Souradip Chakraborty, Amrit Singh Bedi, Emilin Mathew,
Varsha Saravanan, Le Cong, Alvaro Velasquez, Sheng Lin-Gibson, Megan Blewett,
Dan Hendrycs, Alex John London, Ellen Zhong, Ben Raphael, Adji Bousso Dieng,
Jian Ma, Eric Xing, Russ Altman, George Church, Mengdi Wang
ID: 2510.15975
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.15975

Abstract:
The rapid adoption of generative artificial intelligence (GenAI) in the
biosciences is transforming biotechnology, medicine, and synthetic biology. Yet
this advancement is intrinsically linked to new vulnerabilities, as GenAI lowers
the barrier to misuse and introduces novel biosecurity threats, such as
generating synthetic viral proteins or toxins. These dual-use risks are often
overlooked, as existing safety guardrails remain fragile and can be circumvented
through deceptive prompts or jailbreak techniques. In this Perspective, we first
outline the current state of GenAI in the biosciences and emerging threat
vectors ranging from jailbreak attacks and privacy risks to the dual-use
challenges posed by autonomous AI agents. We then examine urgent gaps in
regulation and oversight, drawing on insights from 130 expert interviews across
academia, government, industry, and policy. A large majority ($\approx 76$\%)
expressed concern over AI misuse in biology, and 74\% called for the development
of new governance frameworks. Finally, we explore technical pathways to
mitigation, advocating a multi-layered approach to GenAI safety. These defenses
include rigorous data filtering, alignment with ethical principles during
development, and real-time monitoring to block harmful requests. Together, these
strategies provide a blueprint for embedding security throughout the GenAI
lifecycle. As GenAI becomes integrated into the biosciences, safeguarding this
frontier requires an immediate commitment to both adaptive governance and
secure-by-design technologies.
