Title: Exploring Human-AI Collaboration Using Mental Models of Early Adopters of
Multi-Agent Generative AI Tools
Authors: Suchismita Naik, Austin L. Toombs, Amanda Snellinger, Scott Saponas,
Amanda K. Hall
ID: 2510.06224
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.06224

Abstract:
With recent advancements in multi-agent generative AI (Gen AI), technology
organizations like Microsoft are adopting these complex tools, redefining AI
agents as active collaborators in complex workflows rather than as passive
tools. In this study, we investigated how early adopters and developers
conceptualize multi-agent Gen AI tools, focusing on how they understand human-AI
collaboration mechanisms, general collaboration dynamics, and transparency in
the context of AI tools. We conducted semi-structured interviews with 13
developers, all early adopters of multi-agent Gen AI technology who work at
Microsoft. Our findings revealed that these early adopters conceptualize multi-
agent systems as "teams" of specialized role-based and task-based agents, such
as assistants or reviewers, structured similar to human collaboration models and
ranging from AI-dominant to AI-assisted, user-controlled interactions. We
identified key challenges, including error propagation, unpredictable and
unproductive agent loop behavior, and the need for clear communication to
mitigate the layered transparency issues. Early adopters' perspectives about the
role of transparency underscored its importance as a way to build trust, verify
and trace errors, and prevent misuse, errors, and leaks. The insights and design
considerations we present contribute to CSCW research about collaborative
mechanisms with capabilities ranging from AI-dominant to AI-assisted
interactions, transparency and oversight strategies in human-agent and agent-
agent interactions, and how humans make sense of these multi-agent systems as
dynamic, role-diverse collaborators which are customizable for diverse needs and
workflows. We conclude with future research directions that extend CSCW
approaches to the design of inter-agent and human mediation interactions.
