Title: Quantifying Very Extreme Precipitation and Temperature Using Huge
Ensembles Generated by Machine Learning-based Climate Model Emulators
Authors: Christopher J. Paciorek, Daniel Cooley
ID: 2510.08893
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.08893

Abstract:
Weather extremes produce major impacts on society and ecosystems and are likely
to change in likelihood and magnitude with climate change. However, very low
probability events are hard to characterize statistically using observations or
climate model output because of short records/runs. For precipitation,
consideration of such events arises in quantifying Probable Maximum
Precipitation (PMP), namely estimating extreme precipitation magnitudes for
designing and assessing critical infrastructure. A recent National Academies
report on modernizing PMP estimation proposed using huge climate model-based
ensembles to estimate extreme quantiles, possibly through machine learning-based
ensemble boosting. Here we assess such an approach for the contiguous United
States using a huge ensemble (10560 years) from a state-of-the-art emulator
(ACE2) trained on ERA5 reanalysis. The results indicate that one can practically
estimate very extreme precipitation and temperature quantiles using appropriate
statistical extreme value techniques. More specifically, the results provide
evidence for (1) the use of threshold-exceedance methods with a sufficiently
high threshold for reliable estimation (necessary for precipitation), (2) the
robustness of results to variations in extremes by season and storm type, and
(3) well-constrained statistical uncertainty. Our results also show that the
emulator produces extremes outside the range of the ERA5 training data. While
this suggests that such emulators have potential for quantifying the climatology
of extremes, we do not extensively investigate if this particular emulator is
fit for purpose. Our focus is on how to use huge ensembles to estimate very
extreme statistics, and we expect the results to be relevant for future improved
emulators.
