Title: The impact of stellar winds and tidal locking effects on the habitability
of Earth-like exoplanets around M dwarf stars
Authors: J. P. Hidalgo, D. R. G Schleicher, D. P. González
ID: 2510.20417
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.20417

Abstract:
We present an assessment of the effects of stellar wind magnetic and mechanical
components on the habitability of Earth-like exoplanets orbiting the inner and
outer radii of the habitable zone (HZ) of M dwarfs. We consider stars with
masses in the range of $0.09 - 0.75 M_\odot$ and planets with a surface dipolar
magnetic field of 0.5 G. We estimate the size of the magnetospheres of such
exoplanets using the pressure balance equation including the contribution of
magnetic and ram pressures from stellar winds. We explore different scenarios,
including fast and slow stellar winds, to assess the relevance of kinetic
contribution. Furthermore, the effect of tidal locking and potential deviations
from the Parker spiral, typically used to describe the interplanetary magnetic
field, are analyzed. We show that for low mass stars ($M < 0.15 M_\odot$), the
ram pressure exerted by stellar winds affects the size of the magnetosphere more
than the stellar wind magnetic pressure. Interestingly, when the ram pressure is
not much stronger than the magnetic pressure, typically for higher mass stars,
the inclusion of ram pressure can be beneficial to the magnetosphere due to the
magnetopause currents. A magnetosphere with the size of that of modern Earth is
difficult to achieve with the current assumptions. However, an early Earth
magnetosphere is achieved by roughly half of our hypothetical planets orbiting
the outer radius of the HZ in most of the considered cases. We find that
deviations from the Parker spiral can affect the results significantly, reducing
the magnetosphere by $56\%$ in extreme cases. Most of the hypothetical planets
are most likely (or might be) tidally locked, with the notable exception of
those orbiting the outer HZ of GJ 846 and V1005 Ori.
