Title: VelLMes: A high-interaction AI-based deception framework
Authors: Muris Sladić, Veronica Valeros, Carlos Catania, Sebastian Garcia
ID: 2510.06975
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.06975

Abstract:
There are very few SotA deception systems based on Large Language Models. The
existing ones are limited only to simulating one type of service, mainly SSH
shells. These systems - but also the deception technologies not based on LLMs -
lack an extensive evaluation that includes human attackers. Generative AI has
recently become a valuable asset for cybersecurity researchers and
practitioners, and the field of cyber-deception is no exception. Researchers
have demonstrated how LLMs can be leveraged to create realistic-looking
honeytokens, fake users, and even simulated systems that can be used as
honeypots. This paper presents an AI-based deception framework called VelLMes,
which can simulate multiple protocols and services such as SSH Linux shell,
MySQL, POP3, and HTTP. All of these can be deployed and used as honeypots, thus
VelLMes offers a variety of choices for deception design based on the users'
needs. VelLMes is designed to be attacked by humans, so interactivity and
realism are key for its performance. We evaluate the generative capabilities and
the deception capabilities. Generative capabilities were evaluated using unit
tests for LLMs. The results of the unit tests show that, with careful prompting,
LLMs can produce realistic-looking responses, with some LLMs having a 100%
passing rate. In the case of the SSH Linux shell, we evaluated deception
capabilities with 89 human attackers. The results showed that about 30% of the
attackers thought that they were interacting with a real system when they were
assigned an LLM-based honeypot. Lastly, we deployed 10 instances of the SSH
Linux shell honeypot on the Internet to capture real-life attacks. Analysis of
these attacks showed us that LLM honeypots simulating Linux shells can perform
well against unstructured and unexpected attacks on the Internet, responding
correctly to most of the issued commands.
