Title: Jr. AI Scientist and Its Risk Report: Autonomous Scientific Exploration
from a Baseline Paper
Authors: Atsuyuki Miyai, Mashiro Toyooka, Takashi Otonari, Zaiying Zhao,
Kiyoharu Aizawa
ID: 2511.04583
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.04583

Abstract:
Understanding the current capabilities and risks of AI Scientist systems
(autoresearch) is essential for ensuring trustworthy and sustainable AI-driven
scientific progress while preserving the integrity of the academic ecosystem. To
this end, we develop Jr. AI Scientist, a state-of-the-art autonomous AI
scientist system that mimics the core research workflow of a novice student
researcher: Given the baseline paper from the human mentor, it analyzes its
limitations, formulates novel hypotheses for improvement, iteratively
experiments until improvements are achieved, and writes a paper with the
results. Unlike previous approaches that assume full automation or operate on
small-scale code, Jr. AI Scientist follows a well-defined research workflow and
leverages modern coding agents to handle complex, multi-file implementations,
leading to scientifically valuable contributions. Through our experiments, the
Jr. AI Scientist successfully generated new research papers that build upon real
NeurIPS, IJCV, and ICLR works by proposing and implementing novel methods. For
evaluation, we conducted automated assessments using AI Reviewers, author-led
evaluations, and submissions to Agents4Science, a venue dedicated to AI-driven
contributions. The findings demonstrate that Jr. AI Scientist generates papers
receiving higher review scores by DeepReviewer than existing fully automated
systems. Nevertheless, we identify important limitations from the author
evaluation and the Agents4Science reviews, indicating the potential risks of
directly applying current AI Scientist systems and key challenges for future
research. Finally, we comprehensively report various risks identified during
development. We believe this study clarifies the current role and limitations of
AI Scientist systems, offering insights into the areas that still require human
expertise and the risks that may emerge as these systems evolve.
