Title: When AI Meets the Web: Prompt Injection Risks in Third-Party AI Chatbot
Plugins
Authors: Yigitcan Kaya, Anton Landerer, Stijn Pletinckx, Michelle Zimmermann,
Christopher Kruegel, Giovanni Vigna
ID: 2511.05797
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.05797

Abstract:
Prompt injection attacks pose a critical threat to large language models (LLMs),
with prior work focusing on cutting-edge LLM applications like personal
copilots. In contrast, simpler LLM applications, such as customer service
chatbots, are widespread on the web, yet their security posture and exposure to
such attacks remain poorly understood. These applications often rely on third-
party chatbot plugins that act as intermediaries to commercial LLM APIs,
offering non-expert website builders intuitive ways to customize chatbot
behaviors. To bridge this gap, we present the first large-scale study of 17
third-party chatbot plugins used by over 10,000 public websites, uncovering
previously unknown prompt injection risks in practice. First, 8 of these plugins
(used by 8,000 websites) fail to enforce the integrity of the conversation
history transmitted in network requests between the website visitor and the
chatbot. This oversight amplifies the impact of direct prompt injection attacks
by allowing adversaries to forge conversation histories (including fake system
messages), boosting their ability to elicit unintended behavior (e.g., code
generation) by 3 to 8x. Second, 15 plugins offer tools, such as web-scraping, to
enrich the chatbot's context with website-specific content. However, these tools
do not distinguish the website's trusted content (e.g., product descriptions)
from untrusted, third-party content (e.g., customer reviews), introducing a risk
of indirect prompt injection. Notably, we found that ~13% of e-commerce websites
have already exposed their chatbots to third-party content. We systematically
evaluate both vulnerabilities through controlled experiments grounded in real-
world observations, focusing on factors such as system prompt design and the
underlying LLM. Our findings show that many plugins adopt insecure practices
that undermine the built-in LLM safeguards.
