Title: Improving pulsar search efficiency in next-generation pulsar surveys with
artificial intelligence
Authors: Qiuyang Fu, Mengyao Xue, Weiwei Zhu, N. D. R. Bhat, Kaichao Wu, Zihan
Zhang, B. W. Meyers, Chia Min Tan, Youling Yue, Jiarui Niu, Lingqi Meng, Ziwei
Wu, Ziyao Fang, Yukai Zhou, Jiawei Jin
ID: 2511.06711
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.06711

Abstract:
Pulsar searching with next-generation radio telescopes requires efficiently
sifting through millions of candidates generated by search pipelines to identify
the most promising ones. This challenge has motivated the utilization of
Artificial Intelligence (AI)-based tools. In this work, we explore an optimized
pulsar search pipeline that utilizes deep learning to sift ``snapshot''
candidates generated by folding de-dispersed time series data. This approach
significantly accelerates the search process by reducing the time spent on the
folding step. We also developed a script to generate simulated pulsars for
benchmarking and model fine-tuning. The benchmark analysis used the NGC 5904
globular cluster data and simulated pulsar data, showing that our pipeline
reduces candidate folding time by a factor of $\sim$10 and achieves 100% recall
by recovering all known detectable pulsars in the restricted parameter space. We
also tested the speed-up using data of known pulsars from a single observation
in the Southern-sky MWA Rapid Two-metre (SMART) survey, achieving a
conservatively estimated speed-up factor of 60 in the folding step over a large
parameter space. We tested the model's ability to classify pulsar candidates
using real data collected from the FAST, GBT, MWA, Arecibo, and Parkes,
demonstrating that our method can be generalized to different telescopes. The
results show that the optimized pipeline identifies pulsars with an accuracy of
0.983 and a recall of 0.9844 on the real dataset. This approach can be used to
improve the processing efficiency for the SMART and is also relevant for future
SKA pulsar surveys.
