Title: CoronaGraph Instrument Reference stars for Exoplanets (CorGI-REx) I.
Preliminary Vetting and Implications for the Roman Coronagraph and Habitable
Worlds Observatory
Authors: Justin Hom, Schuyler G. Wolff, Catherine A. Clark, David R. Ciardi,
Sarah J. Deveny, Steve B. Howell, Alexandra Z. Greenbaum, Colin Littlefield,
Ramya M. Anche, Vanessa P. Bailey, Wolfgang Brandner, Gaël Chauvin, Julien H.
Girard, Brian Kern, Eric Mamajek, Bertrand Mennesson, Dmitry Savransky, Karl R.
Stapelfeldt, Beth A. Biller, Marah Brinjikji, Masayuki Kuzuhara, Maxwell A.
Millar-Blanchaer, Toshiyuki Mizuki, Nicholas T. Schragal, Macarena C. Vega-
Pallauta, Jason J. Wang, Robert J. De Rosa, Ewan S. Douglas, Bruce Macintosh,
Jingwen Zhang, the Roman Coronagraph Community Participation Program
ID: 2511.08862
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.08862

Abstract:
The upcoming Roman Coronagraph will be the first high-contrast instrument in
space capable of high-order wavefront sensing and control technologies, a
critical technology demonstration for the proposed Habitable Worlds Observatory
(HWO) that aims to directly image and characterize habitable exoEarths. The
nominal Roman Coronagraph observing plan involves alternating observations of a
science target and a bright, nearby reference star. High contrast is achieved
using wavefront sensing and control, also known as "digging a dark hole", where
performance depends on the properties of the reference star, requiring V<3, a
resolved stellar diameter <2 mas, and no stellar multiplicity. The imposed
brightness and diameter criteria limit the sample of reference star candidates
to high-mass main sequence and post-main sequence objects, where multiplicity
rates are high. A future HWO coronagraph may have similarly restrictive criteria
in reference star selection. From an exhaustive literature review of 95 stars,
we identify an initial list of 40 primary and 18 reserve reference star
candidates relevant to both the Roman Coronagraph and HWO. We present results
from an initial survey of these candidates with high-resolution adaptive optics
imaging and speckle interferometry and identify no new companions. We discuss
the need for higher-contrast observations to sufficiently vet these reference
star candidates prior to Roman Coronagraph observations along with the
implications of reference star criteria on observation planning for Roman and
HWO.
