Title: TextBO: Bayesian Optimization in Language Space for Eval-Efficient Self-
Improving AI
Authors: Enoch Hyunwook Kang, Hema Yoganarasimhan
ID: 2511.12063
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.12063

Abstract:
Large Language Models (LLMs) have enabled self-improving AI systems that
iteratively generate, evaluate, and refine their outcomes. Recent studies show
that prompt-optimization-based self-improvement can outperform state-of-the-art
reinforcement-learning fine-tuning of LLMs, but performance is typically
measured by generation efficiency. However, in many applications, the constraint
is evaluation efficiency: obtaining reliable feedback is far more costly than
generating candidates. To optimize for evaluation efficiency, we extend Upper
Confidence Bound-Bayesian Optimization (UCB-BO), a framework known for optimal
evaluation-efficiency guarantees, to the language domain. Doing so is
challenging for two reasons: (i) gradients needed for UCB-BO are ill-defined in
discrete prompt space; and (ii) UCB-style exploration relies on a surrogate
model and acquisition function, which only live implicitly in the LLM. We
overcome these challenges by proving that combining simple textual gradients
(LLM-proposed local edits) with the Best-of-N selection strategy statistically
emulates ascent along the gradient of the canonical UCB acquisition function.
Based on this result, we propose TextBO, a simple, evaluation-efficient self-
improving algorithm that operates purely in language space without explicit
surrogates or calibrated uncertainty models. We empirically validate TextBO on
automated ad-alignment tasks using a persona-induced preference distribution,
demonstrating superior performance per evaluation compared to strong baselines
such as Best-of-N and GEPA. We also evaluate TextBO's Best-of-N multi-step
textual-gradient mechanism on agentic AI benchmarks by augmenting GEPA with it
and show that it significantly outperforms standard GEPA. In sum, TextBO is a
simple and principled framework for AI self-improving system design that bridges
prompt optimization with classical Bayesian optimization.
