Title: Resonant structures in exozodiacal clouds created by exo-Earths in the
habitable zone of late-type stars
Authors: Seung-Yoo Lee, Masateru Ishiguro, Hangbin Jo, Sung-Chul Yoon
ID: 2511.17872
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.17872

Abstract:
Earth-like exoplanets can create resonant structures in exozodiacal dust through
mean motion resonances (MMRs). These structures not only suggest the presence of
such planets, but also act as potential noise sources in future mid-infrared
(MIR) nulling interferometry observations. We aim to investigate how resonant
structures in exozodiacal dust vary across stellar spectral types (F4--M4), and
to evaluate how stellar wind drag affects their morphology and brightness in
mature planetary systems. We conducted numerical simulations of dust dynamics,
extending earlier studies by including spectral type variation in stellar wind
drag in addition to Poynting-Robertson (PR) drag. Our models represented systems
of a few Gyr hosting an Earth-like exoplanet in the habitable zone (HZ). We
produced spatially resolved maps of optical depth and thermal emission for
different stellar spectral types. Our simulations showed that resonant ring
structures were formed for all stellar spectral types considered. In particular,
we found that stellar wind drag played a critical role in shaping dust dynamics
around old M-type stars, where it could dominate over PR drag by a factor of
approximately 44. This reduced the contrast of resonant rings relative to the
background disk, compared to cases without spectral type variation in stellar
wind. Across different spectral types, the optical depth contrast of the
resonant ring increased for lower-mass stars, assuming a fixed background level.
Asymmetric thermal emission distributions were derived across all spectral
types, which peaked for K-type stars. Our findings highlight the importance of
incorporating both resonant dynamics and stellar wind effects when modeling
exozodiacal dust around stars of different spectral types.
