Title: Neural Computation Without Slots: Steps Towards Biologically Plausible
Memory and Attention in Natural and Artificial Intelligence
Authors: Shaunak Bhandarkar, James L. McClelland
ID: 2511.04593
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.04593

Abstract:
Many models used in artificial intelligence and cognitive science rely on multi-
element patterns stored in "slots" - dedicated storage locations - in a digital
computer. As biological brains likely lack slots, we consider how they might
achieve similar functional outcomes without them by building on the neurally-
inspired modern Hopfield network (MHN; Krotov & Hopfield, 2021), which stores
patterns in the connection weights of an individual neuron. We propose
extensions of this approach to increase its biological plausibility as a model
of memory and to capture an important advantage of slot-based computation in
contemporary language models. For memory, neuroscience research suggests that
the weights of overlapping sparse ensembles of neurons, rather than a dedicated
individual neuron, are used to store a memory. We introduce the K-winner MHN,
extending the approach to ensembles, and find that within a continual learning
regime, the ensemble-based MHN exhibits greater retention of older memories, as
measured by the graded sensitivity measure d', than a standard (one-neuron) MHN.
Next, we consider the powerful use of slot-based memory in contemporary language
models. These models use slots to store long sequences of past inputs and their
learned encodings, supporting later predictions and allowing error signals to be
transported backward in time to adjust weights underlying the learned encodings
of these past inputs. Inspired by these models' successes, we show how the MHN
can be extended to capture both of these important functional outcomes.
Collectively, our modeling approaches constitute steps towards understanding how
biologically plausible mechanisms can support computations that have enabled AI
systems to capture human-like abilities that no prior models have been able to
achieve.
