Title: Personality Pairing Improves Human-AI Collaboration
Authors: Harang Ju, Sinan Aral
ID: 2511.13979
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.13979

Abstract:
Here we ask how AI agent "personalities" interact with human personalities, and
other traits, to shape human-AI collaboration, productivity and performance. To
estimate these relationships, we conducted a large-scale preregistered
randomized experiment that paired 1,258 participants with AI agents that were
prompted to exhibit varying levels of the Big Five personality traits. These
human-AI teams produced 7,266 display ads for a real think tank, and the quality
of these ads was evaluated by 1,995 independent human raters as well as in a
field experiment conducted on X, which generated nearly 5 million impressions.
We found, first, that personality pairing impacted teamwork quality. For
example, neurotic AI improved teamwork for agreeable humans but impaired it for
conscientious humans. Second, we found productivity effects of personality
pairing and a "productivity-performance trade-off" in which certain pairings
(e.g., agreeable human with neurotic AI) produced fewer ads but of higher
quality. Third, personality pairing influenced ad quality and performance. For
example, quality improved when open humans were paired with conscientious AI and
when conscientious humans were paired with disagreeable AI. Some of these
pairing effects were "jagged" in that they varied across text and visual tasks.
For example open humans produced higher quality images but lower quality text
when paired with agreeable AI. Pairing effects were also present in other human
traits, like country of origin. For example, extroverted AI improved quality for
Latin American workers, but degraded quality for East Asian workers. These
findings demonstrate that human-AI personality alignment significantly improves
collaboration, productivity, and performance and lay a foundation for future
research on improving human-AI collaboration through AI personalization.
