Title: Operational machine learning for remote spectroscopic detection of
CH$_{4}$ point sources
Authors: Vít Růžička, Gonzalo Mateo-García, Itziar Irakulis-Loitxate, Juan
Emmanuel Johnson, Manuel Montesino San Martín, Anna Allen, Luis Guanter, David
R. Thompson
ID: 2511.07719
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.07719

Abstract:
Mitigating anthropogenic methane sources is one the most cost-effective levers
to slow down global warming. While satellite-based imaging spectrometers, such
as EMIT, PRISMA, and EnMAP, can detect these point sources, current methane
retrieval methods based on matched filters still produce a high number of false
detections requiring laborious manual verification. This paper describes the
operational deployment of a machine learning system for detecting methane
emissions within the Methane Alert and Response System (MARS) of the United
Nations Environment Programme's International Methane Emissions Observatory. We
created the largest and most diverse global dataset of annotated methane plumes
from three imaging spectrometer missions and quantitatively compared different
deep learning model configurations. Focusing on the requirements for operational
deployment, we extended prior evaluation methodologies from small tiled datasets
to full granule evaluation. This revealed that deep learning models still
produce a large number of false detections, a problem we address with model
ensembling, which reduced false detections by over 74%. Deployed in the MARS
pipeline, our system processes scenes and proposes plumes to analysts,
accelerating the detection and analysis process. During seven months of
operational deployment, it facilitated the verification of 1,351 distinct
methane leaks, resulting in 479 stakeholder notifications. We further
demonstrate the model's utility in verifying mitigation success through case
studies in Libya, Argentina, Oman, and Azerbaijan. Our work represents a
critical step towards a global AI-assisted methane leak detection system, which
is required to process the dramatically higher data volumes expected from new
and current imaging spectrometers.
