Title: ROSBag MCP Server: Analyzing Robot Data with LLMs for Agentic Embodied AI
Applications
Authors: Lei Fu, Sahar Salimpour, Leonardo Militano, Harry Edelman, Jorge Peña
Queralta, Giovanni Toffetti
ID: 2511.03497
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.03497

Abstract:
Agentic AI systems and Physical or Embodied AI systems have been two key
research verticals at the forefront of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics,
with Model Context Protocol (MCP) increasingly becoming a key component and
enabler of agentic applications. However, the literature at the intersection of
these verticals, i.e., Agentic Embodied AI, remains scarce. This paper
introduces an MCP server for analyzing ROS and ROS 2 bags, allowing for
analyzing, visualizing and processing robot data with natural language through
LLMs and VLMs. We describe specific tooling built with robotics domain
knowledge, with our initial release focused on mobile robotics and supporting
natively the analysis of trajectories, laser scan data, transforms, or time
series data. This is in addition to providing an interface to standard ROS 2 CLI
tools ("ros2 bag list" or "ros2 bag info"), as well as the ability to filter
bags with a subset of topics or trimmed in time. Coupled with the MCP server, we
provide a lightweight UI that allows the benchmarking of the tooling with
different LLMs, both proprietary (Anthropic, OpenAI) and open-source (through
Groq). Our experimental results include the analysis of tool calling
capabilities of eight different state-of-the-art LLM/VLM models, both
proprietary and open-source, large and small. Our experiments indicate that
there is a large divide in tool calling capabilities, with Kimi K2 and Claude
Sonnet 4 demonstrating clearly superior performance. We also conclude that there
are multiple factors affecting the success rates, from the tool description
schema to the number of arguments, as well as the number of tools available to
the models. The code is available with a permissive license at
https://github.com/binabik-ai/mcp-rosbags.
