Title: Human-AI Teaming Under Deception: An Implicit BCI Safeguards Drone Team
Performance in Virtual Reality
Authors: Christopher Baker, Stephen Hinton, Akashdeep Nijjar, Riccardo Poli,
Caterina Cinel, Tom Reed, Stephen Fairclough
ID: 2511.19312
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.19312

Abstract:
Human-AI teams can be vulnerable to catastrophic failure when feedback from the
AI is incorrect, especially under high cognitive workload. Traditional team
aggregation methods, such as voting, are susceptible to these AI errors, which
can actively bias the behaviour of each individual and inflate the likelihood of
an erroneous group decision. We hypothesised that a collaborative Brain-Computer
Interface (cBCI) using neural activity collected before a behavioural decision
is made can provide a source of information that is "decoupled" from this biased
behaviour, thereby protecting the team from the deleterious influence of AI
error. We tested this in a VR drone surveillance task where teams of operators
faced high workload and systematically misleading AI cues. Using a passive BCI
(pBCI) framework validated via offline simulation, we compared traditional
behaviour-based team strategies against a purely Neuro-Decoupled Team (NDT) that
used only BCI confidence scores derived from pre-response EEG. Under AI
deception, behaviour-based teams catastrophically failed, with Majority Vote
accuracy collapsing to 42.6% (worse than chance). The NDT, however, maintained a
robust 68.3% accuracy. While this did not exceed the best individual's
theoretical maximum, it provided a critical +25.7% "Safety Net Delta" that
prevented the team from succumbing to the correlated error. This resilience was
explained by a neuro-behavioural decoupling, where the BCI's predictions relied
on preserved posterior-visual processing ("The Truth Signal") while the
operators' executive monitoring systems collapsed. We conclude that an implicit
BCI provides resilience by learning to bypass a compromised executive networks
and access the preserved sensory representation of ground truth, defending
against AI-induced error in high-stakes environments.
