Title: Counterfactual World Models via Digital Twin-conditioned Video Diffusion
Authors: Yiqing Shen, Aiza Maksutova, Chenjia Li, Mathias Unberath
ID: 2511.17481
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.17481

Abstract:
World models learn to predict the temporal evolution of visual observations
given a control signal, potentially enabling agents to reason about environments
through forward simulation. Because of the focus on forward simulation, current
world models generate predictions based on factual observations. For many
emerging applications, such as comprehensive evaluations of physical AI behavior
under varying conditions, the ability of world models to answer counterfactual
queries, such as "what would happen if this object was removed?", is of
increasing importance. We formalize counterfactual world models that
additionally take interventions as explicit inputs, predicting temporal
sequences under hypothetical modifications to observed scene properties.
Traditional world models operate directly on entangled pixel-space
representations where object properties and relationships cannot be selectively
modified. This modeling choice prevents targeted interventions on specific scene
properties. We introduce CWMDT, a framework to overcome those limitations,
turning standard video diffusion models into effective counterfactual world
models. First, CWMDT constructs digital twins of observed scenes to explicitly
encode objects and their relationships, represented as structured text. Second,
CWMDT applies large language models to reason over these representations and
predict how a counterfactual intervention propagates through time to alter the
observed scene. Third, CWMDT conditions a video diffusion model with the
modified representation to generate counterfactual visual sequences. Evaluations
on two benchmarks show that the CWMDT approach achieves state-of-the-art
performance, suggesting that alternative representations of videos, such as the
digital twins considered here, offer powerful control signals for video forward
simulation-based world models.
