Title: Accepted with Minor Revisions: Value of AI-Assisted Scientific Writing
Authors: Sanchaita Hazra, Doeun Lee, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Sachin Kumar
ID: 2511.12529
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.12529

Abstract:
Large Language Models have seen expanding application across domains, yet their
effectiveness as assistive tools for scientific writing - an endeavor requiring
precision, multimodal synthesis, and domain expertise - remains insufficiently
understood. We examine the potential of LLMs to support domain experts in
scientific writing, with a focus on abstract composition. We design an
incentivized randomized controlled trial with a hypothetical conference setup
where participants with relevant expertise are split into an author and reviewer
pool. Inspired by methods in behavioral science, our novel incentive structure
encourages authors to edit the provided abstracts to an acceptable quality for a
peer-reviewed submission. Our 2 x 2 between-subject design expands into two
dimensions: the implicit source of the provided abstract and the disclosure of
it. We find authors make most edits when editing human-written abstracts
compared to AI-generated abstracts without source attribution, often guided by
higher perceived readability in AI generation. Upon disclosure of source
information, the volume of edits converges in both source treatments. Reviewer
decisions remain unaffected by the source of the abstract, but bear a
significant correlation with the number of edits made. Careful stylistic edits,
especially in the case of AI-generated abstracts, in the presence of source
information, improve the chance of acceptance. We find that AI-generated
abstracts hold potential to reach comparable levels of acceptability to human-
written ones with minimal revision, and that perceptions of AI authorship,
rather than objective quality, drive much of the observed editing behavior. Our
findings reverberate the significance of source disclosure in collaborative
scientific writing.
