Title: Kosmos: An AI Scientist for Autonomous Discovery
Authors: Ludovico Mitchener, Angela Yiu, Benjamin Chang, Mathieu Bourdenx, Tyler
Nadolski, Arvis Sulovari, Eric C. Landsness, Daniel L. Barabasi, Siddharth
Narayanan, Nicky Evans, Shriya Reddy, Martha Foiani, Aizad Kamal, Leah P.
Shriver, Fang Cao, Asmamaw T. Wassie, Jon M. Laurent, Edwin Melville-Green, Mayk
Caldas, Albert Bou, Kaleigh F. Roberts, Sladjana Zagorac, Timothy C. Orr,
Miranda E. Orr, Kevin J. Zwezdaryk, Ali E. Ghareeb, Laurie McCoy, Bruna Gomes,
Euan A. Ashley, Karen E. Duff, Tonio Buonassisi, Tom Rainforth, Randall J.
Bateman, Michael Skarlinski, Samuel G. Rodriques, Michaela M. Hinks, Andrew D.
White
ID: 2511.02824
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.02824

Abstract:
Data-driven scientific discovery requires iterative cycles of literature search,
hypothesis generation, and data analysis. Substantial progress has been made
towards AI agents that can automate scientific research, but all such agents
remain limited in the number of actions they can take before losing coherence,
thus limiting the depth of their findings. Here we present Kosmos, an AI
scientist that automates data-driven discovery. Given an open-ended objective
and a dataset, Kosmos runs for up to 12 hours performing cycles of parallel data
analysis, literature search, and hypothesis generation before synthesizing
discoveries into scientific reports. Unlike prior systems, Kosmos uses a
structured world model to share information between a data analysis agent and a
literature search agent. The world model enables Kosmos to coherently pursue the
specified objective over 200 agent rollouts, collectively executing an average
of 42,000 lines of code and reading 1,500 papers per run. Kosmos cites all
statements in its reports with code or primary literature, ensuring its
reasoning is traceable. Independent scientists found 79.4% of statements in
Kosmos reports to be accurate, and collaborators reported that a single 20-cycle
Kosmos run performed the equivalent of 6 months of their own research time on
average. Furthermore, collaborators reported that the number of valuable
scientific findings generated scales linearly with Kosmos cycles (tested up to
20 cycles). We highlight seven discoveries made by Kosmos that span
metabolomics, materials science, neuroscience, and statistical genetics. Three
discoveries independently reproduce findings from preprinted or unpublished
manuscripts that were not accessed by Kosmos at runtime, while four make novel
contributions to the scientific literature.
