Title: Towards AI-Assisted Generation of Military Training Scenarios
Authors: Soham Hans, Volkan Ustun, Benjamin Nye, James Sterrett, Matthew Green
ID: 2511.07690
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.07690

Abstract:
Achieving expert-level performance in simulation-based training relies on the
creation of complex, adaptable scenarios, a traditionally laborious and resource
intensive process. Although prior research explored scenario generation for
military training, pre-LLM AI tools struggled to generate sufficiently complex
or adaptable scenarios. This paper introduces a multi-agent, multi-modal
reasoning framework that leverages Large Language Models (LLMs) to generate
critical training artifacts, such as Operations Orders (OPORDs). We structure
our framework by decomposing scenario generation into a hierarchy of
subproblems, and for each one, defining the role of the AI tool: (1) generating
options for a human author to select from, (2) producing a candidate product for
human approval or modification, or (3) generating textual artifacts fully
automatically. Our framework employs specialized LLM-based agents to address
distinct subproblems. Each agent receives input from preceding subproblem
agents, integrating both text-based scenario details and visual information
(e.g., map features, unit positions and applies specialized reasoning to produce
appropriate outputs. Subsequent agents process these outputs sequentially,
preserving logical consistency and ensuring accurate document generation. This
multi-agent strategy overcomes the limitations of basic prompting or single-
agent approaches when tackling such highly complex tasks. We validate our
framework through a proof-of-concept that generates the scheme of maneuver and
movement section of an OPORD while estimating map positions and movements as a
precursor demonstrating its feasibility and accuracy. Our results demonstrate
the potential of LLM-driven multi-agent systems to generate coherent, nuanced
documents and adapt dynamically to changing conditions, advancing automation in
scenario generation for military training.
