Title: Improving motor imagery decoding methods for an EEG-based mobile brain-
computer interface in the context of the 2024 Cybathlon
Authors: Isabel Whiteley Tscherniak, Niels Christopher Thiemann, Ana McWhinnie-
Fernández, Iustin Curcean, Leon Jokinen, Sadat Hodzic, Thomas E. Huber, Daniel
Pavlov, Manuel Methasani, Pietro Marcolongo, Glenn Viktor Krafczyk, Oscar
Osvaldo Soto Rivera, Thien Le, Flaminia Pallotti, Enrico A. Fazzi, neuroTUM e.
ID: 2511.23384
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.23384

Abstract:
Motivated by the Cybathlon 2024 competition, we developed a modular, online EEG-
based brain-computer interface to address these challenges, increasing
accessibility for individuals with severe mobility impairments. Our system uses
three mental and motor imagery classes to control up to five control signals.
The pipeline consists of four modules: data acquisition, preprocessing,
classification, and the transfer function to map classification output to
control dimensions. We use three diagonalized structured state-space sequence
layers as a deep learning classifier. We developed a training game for our pilot
where the mental tasks control the game during quick-time events. We implemented
a mobile web application for live user feedback. The components were designed
with a human-centred approach in collaboration with the tetraplegic user. We
achieve up to 84% classification accuracy in offline analysis using an
S4D-layer-based model. In a competition setting, our pilot successfully
completed one task; we attribute the reduced performance in this context
primarily to factors such as stress and the challenging competition environment.
Following the Cybathlon, we further validated our pipeline with the original
pilot and an additional participant, achieving a success rate of 73% in real-
time gameplay. We also compare our model to the EEGEncoder, which is slower in
training but has a higher performance. The S4D model outperforms the reference
machine learning models. We provide insights into developing a framework for
portable BCIs, bridging the gap between the laboratory and daily life.
Specifically, our framework integrates modular design, real-time data
processing, user-centred feedback, and low-cost hardware to deliver an
accessible and adaptable BCI solution, addressing critical gaps in current BCI
applications.
