Title: From Classical to Quantum Machine Learning: Different Approaches in
Fission Barrier Height Estimation
Authors: Serkan Akkoyun, Cafer Mert Yeşilkanat, Paul Stevenson
ID: 2511.18350
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.18350

Abstract:
The fission barrier energy is a fundamental property of nuclear structure that
governs the stability of nuclei against fission, directly affecting their
spontaneous fission half-lives and the formation of superheavy elements.
However, because it can only be measured indirectly, it also enables the
emergence of alternative, complementary, fast, and accurate prediction tools for
traditional theoretical models. In this study, we examine the use of classical,
hybrid, and quantum support vector regression (SVR) approaches to estimate
fission barrier heights, starting from fundamental nuclear properties and their
derived additional properties. For this purpose, eight different SVR-based
approaches are considered: (i) Classical SVR, (ii) Enhanced Classical SVR with
polynomial and trigonometric feature extensions, (iii) Quantum-Inspired SVR,
(iv) Hybrid SVR, (v) Enhanced Hybrid SVR, (vi) Quantum Core SVR, (vii) Fixed-
Parameter Quantum Feature Map SVR, and (viii) Pure Quantum SVR. The models were
trained and tested on a dataset of 317 isotopes in the Z (atomic number) range
of 98-126, encompassing the actinide and superheavy regions. The model
performance was evaluated in terms of R2, RMSE, MAE, and training-test R2 gap.
The results show that the hybrid model achieves the best overall performance.
However, while quantum-enhanced approaches are still limited by circuit depth
and optimization precision, they achieve competitive accuracy comparable to
classical results. Considering future developments in quantum hardware and
algorithms, quantum approaches are expected to achieve considerable
improvements. The findings suggest that quantum machine learning can supplement
classical approaches and offer a promising path toward more accurate and
efficient nuclear property predictions.
