Title: Cultural Rights and the Rights to Development in the Age of AI:
Implications for Global Human Rights Governance
Authors: Alexander Kriebitz, Caitlin Corrigan, Aive Pevkur, Alberto Santos
Ferro, Amanda Horzyk, Dirk Brand, Dohee Kim, Dodzi Koku Hattoh, Flavia Massucci,
Gilles Fayad, Kamil Strzepek, Laud Ammah, Lavina Ramkissoon, Mariette Awad,
Natalia Amasiadi, Nathan C. Walker, Nicole Manger, Sophia Devlin
ID: 2512.15786
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.15786

Abstract:
Cultural rights and the right to development are essential norms within the
wider framework of international human rights law. However, recent technological
advances in artificial intelligence (AI) and adjacent digital frontier
technologies pose significant challenges to the protection and realization of
these rights. This owes to the increasing influence of AI systems on the
creation and depiction of cultural content, affect the use and distribution of
the intellectual property of individuals and communities, and influence cultural
participation and expression worldwide. In addition, the growing influence of AI
thus risks exacerbating preexisting economic, social and digital divides and
reinforcing inequities for marginalized communities. This dynamic challenges the
existing interplay between cultural rights and the right to development, and
raises questions about the integration of cultural and developmental
considerations into emerging AI governance frameworks. To address these
challenges, the paper examines the impact of AI on both categories of rights.
Conceptually, it analyzes the epistemic and normative limitations of AI with
respect to cultural and developmental assumptions embedded in algorithmic design
and deployment, but also individual and structural impacts of AI on both rights.
On this basis, the paper identifies gaps and tensions in existing AI governance
frameworks with respect to cultural rights and the right to development.
  By situating cultural rights and the right to development within the broader
landscape of AI and human rights, this paper contributes to the academic
discourse on AI ethics, legal frameworks, and international human rights law.
Finally, it outlines avenues for future research and policy development based on
existing conversations in global AI governance.
