Title: The Forecast Critic: Leveraging Large Language Models for Poor Forecast
Identification
Authors: Luke Bhan, Hanyu Zhang, Andrew Gordon Wilson, Michael W. Mahoney, Chuck
Arvin
ID: 2512.12059
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.12059

Abstract:
Monitoring forecasting systems is critical for customer satisfaction,
profitability, and operational efficiency in large-scale retail businesses. We
propose The Forecast Critic, a system that leverages Large Language Models
(LLMs) for automated forecast monitoring, taking advantage of their broad world
knowledge and strong ``reasoning'' capabilities. As a prerequisite for this, we
systematically evaluate the ability of LLMs to assess time series forecast
quality, focusing on three key questions. (1) Can LLMs be deployed to perform
forecast monitoring and identify obviously unreasonable forecasts? (2) Can LLMs
effectively incorporate unstructured exogenous features to assess what a
reasonable forecast looks like? (3) How does performance vary across model sizes
and reasoning capabilities, measured across state-of-the-art LLMs? We present
three experiments, including on both synthetic and real-world forecasting data.
Our results show that LLMs can reliably detect and critique poor forecasts, such
as those plagued by temporal misalignment, trend inconsistencies, and spike
errors. The best-performing model we evaluated achieves an F1 score of 0.88,
somewhat below human-level performance (F1 score: 0.97). We also demonstrate
that multi-modal LLMs can effectively incorporate unstructured contextual
signals to refine their assessment of the forecast. Models correctly identify
missing or spurious promotional spikes when provided with historical context
about past promotions (F1 score: 0.84). Lastly, we demonstrate that these
techniques succeed in identifying inaccurate forecasts on the real-world M5 time
series dataset, with unreasonable forecasts having an sCRPS at least 10% higher
than that of reasonable forecasts. These findings suggest that LLMs, even
without domain-specific fine-tuning, may provide a viable and scalable option
for automated forecast monitoring and evaluation.
