Title: Task-Specific Trust Evaluation for Multi-Hop Collaborator Selection via
GNN-Aided Distributed Agentic AI
Authors: Botao Zhu, Xianbin Wang, Dusit Niyato
ID: 2512.05788
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.05788

Abstract:
The success of collaborative task completion among networked devices hinges on
the effective selection of trustworthy collaborators. However, accurate task-
specific trust evaluation of multi-hop collaborators can be extremely complex.
The reason is that their trust evaluation is determined by a combination of
diverse trust-related perspectives with different characteristics, including
historical collaboration reliability, volatile and sensitive conditions of
available resources for collaboration, as well as continuously evolving network
topologies. To address this challenge, this paper presents a graph neural
network (GNN)-aided distributed agentic AI (GADAI) framework, in which different
aspects of devices' task-specific trustworthiness are separately evaluated and
jointly integrated to facilitate multi-hop collaborator selection. GADAI first
utilizes a GNN-assisted model to infer device trust from historical
collaboration data. Specifically, it employs GNN to propagate and aggregate
trust information among multi-hop neighbours, resulting in more accurate device
reliability evaluation. Considering the dynamic and privacy-sensitive nature of
device resources, a privacy-preserving resource evaluation mechanism is
implemented using agentic AI. Each device hosts a large AI model-driven agent
capable of autonomously determining whether its local resources meet the
requirements of a given task, ensuring both task-specific and privacy-preserving
trust evaluation. By combining the outcomes of these assessments, only the
trusted devices can coordinate a task-oriented multi-hop cooperation path
through their agents in a distributed manner. Experimental results show that our
proposed GADAI outperforms the comparison algorithms in planning multi-hop paths
that maximize the value of task completion.
