Title: Toward Quantitative Modeling of Cybersecurity Risks Due to AI Misuse
Authors: Steve Barrett, Malcolm Murray, Otter Quarks, Matthew Smith, Jakub Kryś,
Siméon Campos, Alejandro Tlaie Boria, Chloé Touzet, Sevan Hayrapet, Fred
Heiding, Omer Nevo, Adam Swanda, Jair Aguirre, Asher Brass Gershovich, Eric
Clay, Ryan Fetterman, Mario Fritz, Marc Juarez, Vasilios Mavroudis, Henry
Papadatos
ID: 2512.08864
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.08864

Abstract:
Advanced AI systems offer substantial benefits but also introduce risks. In
2025, AI-enabled cyber offense has emerged as a concrete example. This technical
report applies a quantitative risk modeling methodology (described in full in a
companion paper) to this domain. We develop nine detailed cyber risk models that
allow analyzing AI uplift as a function of AI benchmark performance. Each model
decomposes attacks into steps using the MITRE ATT&CK framework and estimates how
AI affects the number of attackers, attack frequency, probability of success,
and resulting harm to determine different types of uplift. To produce these
estimates with associated uncertainty, we employ both human experts, via a
Delphi study, as well as LLM-based simulated experts, both mapping benchmark
scores (from Cybench and BountyBench) to risk model factors. Individual
estimates are aggregated through Monte Carlo simulation. The results indicate
systematic uplift in attack efficacy, speed, and target reach, with different
mechanisms of uplift across risk models. We aim for our quantitative risk
modeling to fulfill several aims: to help cybersecurity teams prioritize
mitigations, AI evaluators design benchmarks, AI developers make more informed
deployment decisions, and policymakers obtain information to set risk
thresholds. Similar goals drove the shift from qualitative to quantitative
assessment over time in other high-risk industries, such as nuclear power. We
propose this methodology and initial application attempt as a step in that
direction for AI risk management. While our estimates carry significant
uncertainty, publishing detailed quantified results can enable experts to
pinpoint exactly where they disagree. This helps to collectively refine
estimates, something that cannot be done with qualitative assessments alone.
