Title: Understanding Critical Thinking in Generative Artificial Intelligence
Use: Development, Validation, and Correlates of the Critical Thinking in AI Use
Scale
Authors: Gabriel R. Lau, Wei Yan Low, Louis Tay, Ysabel Guevarra, Dragan
Gašević, Andree Hartanto
ID: 2512.12413
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.12413

Abstract:
Generative AI tools are increasingly embedded in everyday work and learning, yet
their fluency, opacity, and propensity to hallucinate mean that users must
critically evaluate AI outputs rather than accept them at face value. The
present research conceptualises critical thinking in AI use as a dispositional
tendency to verify the source and content of AI-generated information, to
understand how models work and where they fail, and to reflect on the broader
implications of relying on AI. Across six studies (N = 1365), we developed and
validated the 13-item critical thinking in AI use scale and mapped its
nomological network. Study 1 generated and content-validated scale items. Study
2 supported a three-factor structure (Verification, Motivation, and Reflection).
Studies 3, 4, and 5 confirmed this higher-order model, demonstrated internal
consistency and test-retest reliability, strong factor loadings, sex invariance,
and convergent and discriminant validity. Studies 3 and 4 further revealed that
critical thinking in AI use was positively associated with openness,
extraversion, positive trait affect, and frequency of AI use. Lastly, Study 6
demonstrated criterion validity of the scale, with higher critical thinking in
AI use scores predicting more frequent and diverse verification strategies,
greater veracity-judgement accuracy in a novel and naturalistic ChatGPT-powered
fact-checking task, and deeper reflection about responsible AI. Taken together,
the current work clarifies why and how people exercise oversight over generative
AI outputs and provides a validated scale and ecologically grounded task
paradigm to support theory testing, cross-group, and longitudinal research on
critical engagement with generative AI outputs.
