Title: Building Trustworthy AI for Materials Discovery: From Autonomous
Laboratories to Z-scores
Authors: Benhour Amirian, Ashley S. Dale, Sergei Kalinin, Jason Hattrick-Simpers
ID: 2512.01080
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.01080

Abstract:
Accelerated material discovery increasingly relies on artificial intelligence
and machine learning, collectively termed "AI/ML". A key challenge in using AI
is ensuring that human scientists trust the models are valid and reliable.
Accordingly, we define a trustworthy AI framework GIFTERS for materials science
and discovery to evaluate whether reported machine learning methods are
generalizable, interpretable, fair, transparent, explainable, robust, and
stable. Through a critical literature review, we highlight that these are the
trustworthiness principles most valued by the materials discovery community.
However, we also find that comprehensive approaches to trustworthiness are
rarely reported; this is quantified by a median GIFTERS score of 5/7. We observe
that Bayesian studies frequently omit fair data practices, while non-Bayesian
studies most frequently omit interpretability. Finally, we identify approaches
for improving trustworthiness methods in artificial intelligence and machine
learning for materials science by considering work accomplished in other
scientific disciplines such as healthcare, climate science, and natural language
processing with an emphasis on methods that may transfer to materials discovery
experiments. By combining these observations, we highlight the necessity of
human-in-the-loop, and integrated approaches to bridge the gap between
trustworthiness and uncertainty quantification for future directions of
materials science research. This ensures that AI/ML methods not only accelerate
discovery, but also meet ethical and scientific norms established by the
materials discovery community. This work provides a road map for developing
trustworthy artificial intelligence systems that will accurately and confidently
enable material discovery.
