Title: Training AI Co-Scientists Using Rubric Rewards
Authors: Shashwat Goel, Rishi Hazra, Dulhan Jayalath, Timon Willi, Parag Jain,
William F. Shen, Ilias Leontiadis, Francesco Barbieri, Yoram Bachrach, Jonas
Geiping, Chenxi Whitehouse
ID: 2512.23707
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.23707

Abstract:
AI co-scientists are emerging as a tool to assist human researchers in achieving
their research goals. A crucial feature of these AI co-scientists is the ability
to generate a research plan given a set of aims and constraints. The plan may be
used by researchers for brainstorming, or may even be implemented after further
refinement. However, language models currently struggle to generate research
plans that follow all constraints and implicit requirements. In this work, we
study how to leverage the vast corpus of existing research papers to train
language models that generate better research plans. We build a scalable,
diverse training corpus by automatically extracting research goals and goal-
specific grading rubrics from papers across several domains. We then train
models for research plan generation via reinforcement learning with self-
grading. A frozen copy of the initial policy acts as the grader during training,
with the rubrics creating a generator-verifier gap that enables improvements
without external human supervision. To validate this approach, we conduct a
study with human experts for machine learning research goals, spanning 225
hours. The experts prefer plans generated by our finetuned Qwen3-30B-A3B model
over the initial model for 70% of research goals, and approve 84% of the
automatically extracted goal-specific grading rubrics. To assess generality, we
also extend our approach to research goals from medical papers, and new arXiv
preprints, evaluating with a jury of frontier models. Our finetuning yields
12-22% relative improvements and significant cross-domain generalization,
proving effective even in problem settings like medical research where execution
feedback is infeasible. Together, these findings demonstrate the potential of a
scalable, automated training recipe as a step towards improving general AI co-
scientists.
