Title: Evaluation of AI Ethics Tools in Language Models: A Developers'
Perspective Case Stud
Authors: Jhessica Silva, Diego A. B. Moreira, Gabriel O. dos Santos, Alef
Ferreira, Helena Maia, Sandra Avila, Helio Pedrini
ID: 2512.15791
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.15791

Abstract:
In Artificial Intelligence (AI), language models have gained significant
importance due to the widespread adoption of systems capable of simulating
realistic conversations with humans through text generation. Because of their
impact on society, developing and deploying these language models must be done
responsibly, with attention to their negative impacts and possible harms. In
this scenario, the number of AI Ethics Tools (AIETs) publications has recently
increased. These AIETs are designed to help developers, companies, governments,
and other stakeholders establish trust, transparency, and responsibility with
their technologies by bringing accepted values to guide AI's design,
development, and use stages. However, many AIETs lack good documentation,
examples of use, and proof of their effectiveness in practice. This paper
presents a methodology for evaluating AIETs in language models. Our approach
involved an extensive literature survey on 213 AIETs, and after applying
inclusion and exclusion criteria, we selected four AIETs: Model Cards, ALTAI,
FactSheets, and Harms Modeling. For evaluation, we applied AIETs to language
models developed for the Portuguese language, conducting 35 hours of interviews
with their developers. The evaluation considered the developers' perspective on
the AIETs' use and quality in helping to identify ethical considerations about
their model. The results suggest that the applied AIETs serve as a guide for
formulating general ethical considerations about language models. However, we
note that they do not address unique aspects of these models, such as idiomatic
expressions. Additionally, these AIETs did not help to identify potential
negative impacts of models for the Portuguese language.
