Title: Multi-bandpass Photometry for Exoplanet Atmosphere Reconnaissance (MPEAR)
with the Habitable Worlds Observatory (HWO) -- I. Differentiating Earth from
Neptunes During Discovery
Authors: Eleonora Alei, Avi M. Mandell, Miles H. Currie, Aki Roberge,
Christopher C. Stark, Allison Payne, Vincent Kofman, Geronimo L. Villanueva,
Renyu Hu, Amber V. Young
ID: 2512.05279
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.05279

Abstract:
As the architecture for the Habitable Worlds Observatory (HWO) is being
developed, it is crucial to optimize the observing strategies for a survey to
detect and characterize Earth-like planets around Sun-like stars. Efficient
target identification and characterization will help drive mission requirements
that can be matched to the planned observations. Current HWO concepts allow
simultaneous multi-bandpass observations with the coronagraph instrument,
critical for performing a qualitative planetary reconnaissance to optimize
observing time for deriving orbital constraints and prioritize characterization
of promising targets.
  We describe a new algorithm designed to determine the best combination of
broadband photometric observations for extracting maximum information from the
first visit. It identifies degeneracies in the orbital configurations, fluxes,
and noise, and determines optimal secondary photometry bands to reduce these. We
demonstrate its application by comparing an Earth seen at quadrature with a cold
and a warm Neptune at inclined orbits and varying phases, with comparable flux
in the discovery bandpass centered at 500 nm (20\% bandwidth). Using the noise
and exposure time calculator that we developed for the HWO coronagraph
instrument, we find that the baseline $S/N=7$ (corresponding to 3.2 hours
observing time for a planet at 10pc) is only sufficient to marginally
differentiate the Earth from a cold Neptune-like planet assuming two parallel
bandpasses (550 nm + 850 nm). However, increasing to $S/N=15$ (7 hours observing
time) and using three parallel bandpasses (360 nm + 500 nm + 1.11 micron) would
differentiate the Earth from either a warm or cold Neptune.
