Title: Mapping AI Risk Mitigations: Evidence Scan and Preliminary AI Risk
Mitigation Taxonomy
Authors: Alexander K. Saeri, Sophia Lloyd George, Jess Graham, Clelia D.
Lacarriere, Peter Slattery, Michael Noetel, Neil Thompson
ID: 2512.11931
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.11931

Abstract:
Organizations and governments that develop, deploy, use, and govern AI must
coordinate on effective risk mitigation. However, the landscape of AI risk
mitigation frameworks is fragmented, uses inconsistent terminology, and has gaps
in coverage. This paper introduces a preliminary AI Risk Mitigation Taxonomy to
organize AI risk mitigations and provide a common frame of reference. The
Taxonomy was developed through a rapid evidence scan of 13 AI risk mitigation
frameworks published between 2023-2025, which were extracted into a living
database of 831 AI risk mitigations. The mitigations were iteratively clustered
& coded to create the Taxonomy. The preliminary AI Risk Mitigation Taxonomy
organizes mitigations into four categories and 23 subcategories: (1) Governance
& Oversight: Formal organizational structures and policy frameworks that
establish human oversight mechanisms and decision protocols; (2) Technical &
Security: Technical, physical, and engineering safeguards that secure AI systems
and constrain model behaviors; (3) Operational Process: processes and management
frameworks governing AI system deployment, usage, monitoring, incident handling,
and validation; and (4) Transparency & Accountability: formal disclosure
practices and verification mechanisms that communicate AI system information and
enable external scrutiny. The rapid evidence scan and taxonomy construction also
revealed several cases where terms like 'risk management' and 'red teaming' are
used widely but refer to different responsible actors, actions, and mechanisms
of action to reduce risk. This Taxonomy and associated mitigation database,
while preliminary, offers a starting point for collation and synthesis of AI
risk mitigations. It also offers an accessible, structured way for different
actors in the AI ecosystem to discuss and coordinate action to reduce risks from
AI.
