Title: Fostering human learning is crucial for boosting human-AI synergy
Authors: Julian Berger, Jason W. Burton, Ralph Hertwig, Thomas Kosch, Ralf H. J.
M. Kurvers, Benito Kurzenberger, Christopher Lazik, Linda Onnasch, Tobias
Rieger, Anna I. Thoma, Dirk U. Wulff, Stefan M. Herzog
ID: 2512.13253
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.13253

Abstract:
The collaboration between humans and artificial intelligence (AI) holds the
promise of achieving superior outcomes compared to either acting alone.
Nevertheless, our understanding of the conditions that facilitate such human-AI
synergy remains limited. A recent meta-analysis showed that, on average, human-
AI combinations do not outperform the better individual agent, indicating
overall negative human-AI synergy. We argue that this pessimistic conclusion
arises from insufficient attention to human learning in the experimental designs
used. To substantiate this claim, we re-analyzed all 74 studies included in the
original meta-analysis, which yielded two new findings. First, most previous
research overlooked design features that foster human learning, such as
providing trial-by-trial outcome feedback to participants. Second, our re-
analysis, using robust Bayesian meta-regressions, demonstrated that studies
providing outcome feedback show relatively higher synergy than those without
outcome feedback. Crucially, when feedback is paired with AI explanations we
tend to find positive human-AI synergy, while AI explanations provided without
feedback were strongly linked to negative synergy, indicating that explanations
are useful for synergy only when humans can learn to verify the AI's reliability
through feedback. We conclude that the current literature underestimates the
potential for human-AI collaboration because it predominantly relies on
experimental designs that do not facilitate human learning, thus hindering
humans from effectively adapting their collaboration strategies. We therefore
advocate for a paradigm shift in human-AI interaction research that explicitly
incorporates and tests human learning mechanisms to enhance our understanding of
and support for successful human-AI collaboration.
