Title: NeuralCrop: Combining physics and machine learning for improved crop
yield predictions
Authors: Yunan Lin, Sebastian Bathiany, Maha Badri, Maximilian Gelbrecht,
Philipp Hess, Brian Groenke, Jens Heinke, Christoph Müller, Niklas Boers
ID: 2512.20177
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.20177

Abstract:
Global gridded crop models (GGCMs) simulate daily crop growth by explicitly
representing key biophysical processes and project end-of-season yield time
series. They are a primary tool to quantify the impacts of climate change on
agricultural productivity and assess associated risks for food security. Despite
decades of development, state-of-the-art GGCMs still have substantial
uncertainties in simulating complex biophysical processes due to limited process
understanding. Recently, machine learning approaches trained on observational
data have shown great potential in crop yield predictions. However, these models
have not demonstrated improved performance over classical GGCMs and are not
suitable for simulating crop yields under changing climate conditions due to
problems in generalizing outside their training distributions. Here we introduce
NeuralCrop, a hybrid GGCM that combines the strengths of an advanced process-
based GGCM, resolving important processes explicitly, with data-driven machine
learning components. The model is first trained to emulate a competitive GGCM
before it is fine-tuned on observational data. We show that NeuralCrop
outperforms state-of-the-art GGCMs across site-level and large-scale cropping
regions. Across moisture conditions, NeuralCrop reproduces the interannual yield
anomalies in European wheat regions and the US Corn Belt more accurately during
the period from 2000 to 2019 with particularly strong improvements under drought
extremes. When generalizing to conditions unseen during training, NeuralCrop
continues to make robust projections, while pure machine learning models exhibit
substantial performance degradation. Our results show that our hybrid crop
modelling approach offers overall improved crop modeling and more reliable yield
projections under climate change and intensifying extreme weather conditions.
