Title: Full-Stack Alignment: Co-Aligning AI and Institutions with Thick Models
of Value
Authors: Joe Edelman, Tan Zhi-Xuan, Ryan Lowe, Oliver Klingefjord, Vincent Wang-
Mascianica, Matija Franklin, Ryan Othniel Kearns, Ellie Hain, Atrisha Sarkar,
Michiel Bakker, Fazl Barez, David Duvenaud, Jakob Foerster, Iason Gabriel,
Joseph Gubbels, Bryce Goodman, Andreas Haupt, Jobst Heitzig, Julian Jara-
Ettinger, Atoosa Kasirzadeh, James Ravi Kirkpatrick, Andrew Koh, W. Bradley
Knox, Philipp Koralus, Joel Lehman, Sydney Levine, Samuele Marro, Manon Revel,
Toby Shorin, Morgan Sutherland, Michael Henry Tessler, Ivan Vendrov, James
Wilken-Smith
ID: 2512.03399
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.03399

Abstract:
Beneficial societal outcomes cannot be guaranteed by aligning individual AI
systems with the intentions of their operators or users. Even an AI system that
is perfectly aligned to the intentions of its operating organization can lead to
bad outcomes if the goals of that organization are misaligned with those of
other institutions and individuals. For this reason, we need full-stack
alignment, the concurrent alignment of AI systems and the institutions that
shape them with what people value. This can be done without imposing a
particular vision of individual or collective flourishing. We argue that current
approaches for representing values, such as utility functions, preference
orderings, or unstructured text, struggle to address these and other issues
effectively. They struggle to distinguish values from other signals, to support
principled normative reasoning, and to model collective goods. We propose thick
models of value will be needed. These structure the way values and norms are
represented, enabling systems to distinguish enduring values from fleeting
preferences, to model the social embedding of individual choices, and to reason
normatively, applying values in new domains. We demonstrate this approach in
five areas: AI value stewardship, normatively competent agents, win-win
negotiation systems, meaning-preserving economic mechanisms, and democratic
regulatory institutions.
