Title: Modeling the Mental World for Embodied AI: A Comprehensive Review
Authors: Biyuan Liu, Daigang Xu, Lei Jiang, Wenjun Guo, Ping Chen
ID: 2601.02378
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.02378

Abstract:
As the application of Embodied AI Agents in avatars, wearable devices, and
robotic systems continues to deepen, their core research challenges have
gradually shifted from physical environment interaction to the accurate
understanding of social interactions. Traditional physical world models (PWM)
focus on quantifiable physical attributes such as space and motion, failing to
meet the needs of social intelligence modeling. In contrast, the Mental World
Model (MWM), as a structured representation of humans' internal mental states,
has become the critical cognitive foundation for embodied agents to achieve
natural human-machine collaboration and dynamic social adaptation. However,
current MWM research faces significant bottlenecks: such as fragmented
conceptual framework with vague boundaries between MWM and PWM, disjointed
reasoning mechanisms for the technical pathways and applicable scenarios of
different Theory of Mind (ToM) reasoning paradigms, and detachment between
evaluation and practice.
  To address these issues, this review systematically synthesizes over 100
authoritative studies to provide a comprehensive overview of MWM research for
embodied AI. Its core contributions are threefold: First, it constructs a
complete theoretical framework for MWM for the first time. Specifically, it
distinguishes the essential differences between MWM and PWMs. Second, it
systematically defines the key components of MWM through two paradigms for
mental element representation. Third, it comprehensively analyzes two core ToM
reasoning paradigms with 19 ToM methods. Finally, it also clarifies the
integration trend of neuro-symbolic hybrid architectures, and synthesizes 26 ToM
evaluation benchmarks. This work aims to promote the integration of embodied
agents into human society and advance the in-depth development of human-machine
collaborative interaction.
