Title: Narrative Matters: Young people, social media and body image
Authors: Victoria A. Goodyear
ID: openalex.W2969902897
URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/camh.12345

Social media is a ubiquitous element of young people's lives. It was recently
reported that for 12- to 15-year-olds in the UK, 83% have their own smartphone,
99% go online for over 20 hours per week, and 69% have a social media profile
(Ofcom, 2018). Many young people do not experience the online/offline binary
that characterises the lives of older generations. Social media is a key
resource in young people's lives for the development of identities and
relationships, as well as emotional regulation, self-expression, learning and
much more (Third, Bellerose, Oliveira, Lala, & Theakstone, 2017). Disconnecting
from social media is likely to be a challenge and unthinkable for many
contemporary young people. The digital lives of contemporary young people
greatly differ from many adults. This has inevitably created challenges for many
teachers, parents and clinicians who have a responsibility for young people's
health and well-being. There is already evidence that many adults feel helpless
as they watch youth engaging with the tsunami of digital content and, as a
result, they are tending to cede control to technology and social media
companies (Goodyear & Armour, 2019). All of this suggests that teachers, parents
and clinicians require access to the latest evidence-based guidance to help
protect young people from risk and to embrace the opportunities on offer. One
aspect of social media uses that adults frequently report to be concerning is in
relation to body image. Extending the well-established and profound influence of
passive media (e.g. TV, magazines), social media is a mass user-generated space
in which young people can access and coproduce videos and images related to the
body. Indeed, the rise of ‘healthism’ (an ideological, neoliberal and public
construct of health) and concerns about individual autonomy, self-monitoring and
obsession/addiction from social media seen in adults are concerns in youth that
are growing (Burnette, Kwitowski, & Mazzeo, 2017). In order to offer support
that will be effective, it is important for adults to be aware of the risks as
well as appreciative of the potential benefits of social media use for young
people's health and well-being, particularly in relation to body image. For
example, there is a growing body of evidence that suggests social media can be a
positive educational health and well-being resource (Goodyear & Armour, 2019).
Research has highlighted that social media provides a context for young people
to access social and emotional support, as well as develop a critical awareness
of a diverse range of information and content (Third et al., 2017). Social media
is a highly interactive space inhabited by young people. In order to understand
the relationship between social media use and body image, it is therefore
important to not only focus on the information that is accessible to young
people, but also the content that young people interact with, mobilise and
generate. In relation to body image, it is well established that self-
presentation on social media is of central importance to young people, and can
drive the ways in which young people participate, interact and communicate
(Handyside & Ringrose, 2017). Across a range of different mediums, it is
certainly evident that many young people post photographs of their bodies in
ways that conform to particular body ideals, such as through the use of selfies
and/or filters (Burnette et al., 2017). This behaviour can have an
affective/emotive influence on how other young people their age feel they should
look, extending, for example, the traditional influence of celebrities from
magazines (Goodyear & Armour, 2019). In addition, the images that young people
share of themselves and their bodies while, perhaps, posted transiently, can
take on an unanticipated life. The self-focused behaviour can invite personal
judgement, ridicule and criticism. ‘Teen’ produced content can also circulate
widely and be used within peer networks as a form of digital currency. In turn,
young people can become obsessed with the ways they look on social media, and it
has been suggested that some are addicted to the feedback they obtain on whether
their bodies conform to socially acceptable standards (Handyside & Ringrose,
2017). To help adults better understand the ways in which social media shapes
and influences young people's health and well-being, a focus on the ways in
which young people use and generate content can be helpful. Informed by a
pedagogical perspective, content is not only information, such as images related
to particular types of bodies (Goodyear & Armour, 2019). Content in the context
of the user-generated spaces of social media is more dynamic and involves the
interactive functionalities (likes, algorithms) in the construction of content,
as well as how content is mobilised, and reaches and influences users. In recent
research coproduced with young people, five forms of social media content were
reported to be influential on health-related knowledge and behaviours (Goodyear,
Armour, & Wood, 2018; see Table 1). These forms of content include a dual focus
on the accessibility of information, and the ways in which young people generate
content. One approach for relevant adults, therefore, is to use these forms of
content to understand and engage with young people's needs and behaviours,
and/or to design programmes and interventions to ensure that they are relevant
and authentic to young people's needs and interests (see Goodyear et al., 2018).
For example, automatically sourced content can be used to engage young people in
a critical analysis of how they have come to understand different bodies, and
what they conceptualise as a ‘healthy body’. Alternatively, the role of likes
can be used in interventions to help young people critically evaluate moral and
ethical behaviours in conceptualisations of information coproduced on social
media about body image. There is clear evidence that social media is a very
powerful educative health resource that has considerable significance in the
lives of young people. Most young people experience positive impacts and are
critically aware users and generators of social media. While the health-related
risks of social media should not be excluded, adults must focus on supporting
young people to engage with social media so that they can realise more of the
positive impacts on their health and well-being, particularly in the areas of
body image. The health-related risks of social media should not be ignored, but
an action for adults is to become suitably digital literate so that they can
promote positive outcomes and offer support to young people at times of
vulnerability. A focus on digital literacy for adults would see adults able to
critically evaluate different forms of content for their own and young people's
lives, as well as developing the necessary digital skills so that they can
navigate digital mediums and offer appropriate support. To help adults develop a
better awareness of how the forms of content impact on young people, evidence-
based training resources can be accessed from:
http://opencpd.net/Guidelines.html. This work was supported by the Wellcome
Trust [201601/Z/16/Z]. The author has declared that she has no competing or
potential conflicts of interest. No ethical approval was required for this
article.
