Title: The development of the art of the domra playing in Ukraine in the context of the revival of folk musical-instrumental culture at the turn of the XX–XXI centuries
Authors: Яна Данилюк
ID: openalex.W3034150510
URL: http://doi.org/10.34064/khnum2-18.07

Formulation of the problem. The article contains the analysis of the problem of
the domra performing development under conditions of strengthening the culture-
creating role of folk instrumental art in the late XX – early XXI centuries. The
analysis of historical and pedagogical sources ensured the authenticity of the
author’s determining the prerequisites for the development of the domra art in
the time studied. Among them there are: the deep historical folk and academic
traditions of the domra playing, popularity of the amateur and professional
domra performing and composer creativity, development of the process of teaching
the domra, scientific research in the field of art history, pedagogy and
methodology, and the like. It was established that the development of domra
performing in the context of the general process of forming Ukrainian organology
as an independent scientific and artistic field in the late XIX – early XX
centuries was greatly contributed by the scientific and practical proceedings of
scholars, such as the art historians, educators and artists P. Demutsky, K.
Kvitka, M. Lysenko, S. Liudkevych, H. Khotkevych and others, who substantially
studied the properties of various national musical instruments (domra, flute,
trembita, kobza-bandura, lira, violin, cymbals, bassolia, tambourine, buhai,
drymba, horseshoe, derkach and others). At the same time, there is a lack of
elaboration of the problem of the development of domra art in Ukraine both in
terms of studying the theory and methodology of modern folk instrumental
performing, as well as in historical and pedagogical terms. In particular, the
development of questions of the development of domra performing in Ukraine at
the turn of the XX–XXI centuries remains not completely exhausted. Proceeding
from this, the purpose of the article is to analyze the prerequisites and
factors of the formation of domra performing in Ukraine in the context of the
dynamics of the national folk musical and instrumental culture in the late XX
and early XXI centuries. The appliance of problem-chronological, comparative
historical and retrospective methods allowed the author to scientifically
substantiate the facts of the national domra performing development in the late
XX – early XXI centuries. The study’s results. An important factor in the
development of domra performing art at the crossroads of the centuries was the
rethinking of the existing and the creation of a new repertoire policy of
performing activities. Traditionally, the repertoire basis of domra performing
art was drawn from two key sources: the folk repertoire, which developed
depending on the historical conditions specific to the folk instrumental genre,
and from academic works that inherited the traditions of European and native
cultures of the XX century. It was discovered that during the period under
study, the development of domra’s performing was facilitated by the stylistic
and substantial enrichment of the repertoire for solo and ensemble, the search
for new timbre-articulation connections, new ensemble heterophony – co-creation
of composers and performers-domrists, who provided the appearance of new
original content, form, performing technique of composer discoveries, so that at
the turn of the XX – XXI centuries appeared a significant number of modern
compositions for domra. In the article it is noted that in the period under
study, the musical and performing arts to a certain extent found independent
status as a special field of identifying the musician’s artistic and creative
abilities in terms of the original interpretation of musical works and masterly
performance on the instrument. The development of the domra art was facilitated
by the improvement of the process of preparing performers, the publication of
teaching and methodic aids built on the fundamental musical and theoretical
basis, the appearance of the constellation of new world-famous talented
performers on this instrument. The level of professional training of performers
on folk instruments had become so high that it allowed not only to widely adapt
classical works created for other musical instruments, but also to successfully
write and perform new original domra compositions. At that time, in Ukraine,
original instrumental schools of folk-instrumental art were preserving and
continuing to form, known both, locally and internationally, including the
Kharkiv school (М. Lysenko, F. Kоrоvai, B. Mikhieiev, Ya. Danilyuk, N. Kostenko,
I. Kononova and others), Donetsk school (V. Ivko, S. Bilousova, T. Lytvynets, T.
Setti, I. Maksymenko and others), Kyiv school (S. Bilokoniev, V. Bilous, L.
Matvyichuk and others), Odesa school (V. Kyrychenko, S. Murza, A. Oleinyk, D.
Orlova, I. Formaniuk and others) and Dnipro school (N. Bashmakova, V. Kikas and
others). Each school, while retaining its originality in approaching the
repertory basis selection, the expansion of performing techniques, the
development of teaching domra performing methods, was marked by significant
achievements in the development of domra performance art in Ukraine in the
period under study. A significant factor in the rise of the domra performing art
was conduction of a wide concert and festival popularization activity aimed at
promoting the national Ukrainian art in Ukraine and abroad. Analysis of concert-
competitive programs, announcements, booklets, informational messages in
Internet sources confirms the conduction in Ukraine at the turn of the XX – XXI
centuries of a significant number of competitions of national and international
level, where Ukrainian domrists demonstrated high skills in the nominations
“Domra” and “Ensemble Performance”. Such as the International Competition of
Performers on Ukrainian Folk Instruments named after Hnat Khotkevych, the
International Folk Instruments Performers Competition “Art-Dominanta”, the
Nationwide Festival-Competition of Performers on Folk Musical Instruments
“Provesin”, the Nationwide Open Festival-Competition of Performing Arts and Play
on folk instruments “Barvy Poltavy” (Poltava Colors), the annual Forum of
performers on folk instruments within the International Festival of Musical Art
“Music Without Borders” and others. Conclusion. Identified trends are a
guarantee of further academicization of folk instrumental art (publication of
teaching and teaching aids and methodical literature, development of research
work, enrichment of the system of contests of performers, etc.), as well as the
spread of the concert and festival movement aimed at promoting national
Ukrainian art, search of its new identity and independence, where the domra
music has its rightful place.
