Title: Negotiation of Individual and Collective Identities in the Online Discourse of Autistic Adults
Authors: So Yoon Kim, Kristen Bottema‐Beutel
ID: openalex.W2921521172
URL: https://doi.org/10.1089/aut.2018.0029

<b>Why was this study done and what was the purpose of this study?:</b> More
autistic individuals are using the internet to communicate, and research has
shown that online communication can benefit autistic individuals in various
ways. However, there is a lack of understanding of how online communication is
related to autistic identity. We examined how autistic bloggers' stories about
their stimming experiences contributed to individual and collective autistic
identities. Stimming refers to repetitive body movements, movements of objects,
and other repetitive and restricted behavior and is considered one of two core
features of an autism diagnosis. Although some stakeholders such as educators or
parents have tried to get rid of these repetitive movements because they believe
that stimming is not an appropriate behavior, autistic and other neurodiversity
advocates assert that stimming is beneficial for autistic individuals and is
important for developing an autistic identity.<b>What did we do?:</b> We
examined nine blog posts written by autistic bloggers using a method referred to
as discourse analysis. In each blog post that we analyzed, the author shares
their experiences about stimming. Discourse analysis is a method used to explore
how people use language to build meaning, including the formation of social
identities. Therefore, particular attention was paid to <i>how</i> the bloggers
told the narrative (i.e., specific word choices to describe characters within
the narrative and verb tense).<b>What were the results and implications of the
study?:</b> We found that by sharing stories about their stimming experience in
the context of blog posts, autistic individuals developed empowered individual
and collective autistic identities and challenged dominant and neurotypical
social norms. Also, within online space, autistic individuals formed social
relationships and connections that contributed to a collective identity. More
research on how autistic individuals develop supportive relationships and form
advocacy communities within online spaces is needed to promote emotional well-
being and overall quality of life in this population.
