Title: Attachment security and attention to facial emotional expressions in preschoolers: An eye‐tracking study
Authors: Marina Kammermeier, Lena Duran Perez, Lilith König, Markus Paulus
ID: openalex.W2989913916
URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/bjdp.12313

According to attachment theory, internal working models of attachment affect the
way in which social and emotional information is processed. The current study
examined this theoretical claim by investigating the association between
attachment security and attention to facial emotional expressions in 5-year-old
children. Attachment security was assessed on a representational level using an
Attachment Story Completion Task. Children's attention to facial emotional
expressions was measured during an eye-tracking task. Gaze data (fixation
duration) were collected during the presentation of pictures displaying five
different facial emotional expressions (neutral, angry, fearful, sad, and happy)
of unfamiliar persons. Moreover, the Emotionality-Activity-Sociability
Temperament Inventory was used to control for children's temperament and was
filled out by children's mothers. Regression analyses revealed that attachment
security was a significant predictor of children's attention to neutral and sad
expressions while controlling for age, gender, and temperament. Moreover, a
t-test revealed that securely attached children looked longer at the fearful
expression than insecurely attached children. These findings provide direct
evidence that even on a basic perceptional level attachment security is a
predictor of children's emotional information processing. Statement of
contribution What is already known on this subject? Attachment representations
substantially affect the way in which emotional information is processed.
Insecure attachment representations are negatively related to children's
attention to emotional stimuli. What does this study add? Eye-tracking
technology was used to measure children's visual attention to facial emotional
expressions. Secure attachment was related to prolonged visual attention to
neutral and negative facial emotional expressions. Attachment security
influences children's emotional information processing even on a basic
perceptual level.
