Title: Reflections on challenges of preferring the male child in an African marriage – A practical theological observation
Authors: Magezi Elijah Baloyi, Matsobane J. Manala
ID: openalex.W2984595708
URL: https://doi.org/10.4102/ve.v40i1.1852

Children are considered the crowning glory in an African marriage – the more
children are conceived during the marriage, the greater the glory. There are
certain expectations from family, and an African community, especially to
married couples. Presumably, families pity the deaths of childless couples
because they will not be remembered when they die. From an African perspective,
one of the purposes of marriage is childbearing. When a child is born, it is
expected from community to congratulate the couple. Among some tribes, it is
considered an abomination for any member of the community to delay or refuse to
congratulate the new mother. That is why monogamous marriages in which no
children are born are difficult to endure. Because children are regarded as the
crowning glory of a marriage, evidence shows that in some instances those who
cannot bear children are regarded as abnormal and outcasts. Hence, polygamy was
practised as a way of begetting children in barren marriages. It is debatable
that parenthood remains a critical issue for the success of most marriages.
Although childbearing is applauded, male children are given more priority than
female children. It is, therefore, the intention of the researchers to argue
that the birth of male children, which is celebrated more than the birth of
female children, contributes to undermining one gender in favour of the other.
The reader will become aware of the negative role of patriarchy. Without
detracting from the joyous moment of the birth of a child in an African family,
the researchers assert that it is important to celebrate the birth of children
of both genders equally. This article is based on insiders’ observations and a
relevant literature study. Intradisciplinary and/or interdisciplinary
implications: We raise these African cultural issues of concern to enable
situation analysis efforts and stimulate the search for improvements. This
article highlights the African cultural beliefs and practices relating to the
preference of the boy child over the girl child. The value of this discussion is
to inform people about the negative views and conduct of African cultural
origin, to highlight, disapprovingly, gender inequality among some African
peoples. While this is a contribution to the discussion in gender discourse, it
is also a practical theological attempt to encourage equality as demanded by the
Christian teaching and the South African constitution that embraces human
rights. While highlighting the cultural situations, it also points out to the
need for transformation; hence, the pastoral counselling recommendations towards
new theoretical framework that aims at improving the situation. This
contribution is, thus, a necessary multi-discipline enterprise to provide
knowledge and encourage women’s self-determination.
