Title: A sociocultural exploration of young children’s relationships with science: towards a practice theory of interest
Authors: Zoe Crompton
ID: openalex.W3013173973
URL: 

Much of the literature on pupils’ engagement with science is founded on an
assumption that interest in science is a personal characteristic, which is
‘sparked’ by activities that hold particular fascination for the learner. In
contrast, this thesis develops a practice theory of interest in science, which
adopts a sociocultural view and holds that children’s interests are enacted as
part of their developing identities at home and school. Building on Holland et
al.’s (1998) concept of ‘identity in practice’ and González, et al.’s (2006)
‘funds of knowledge’, a practice theory of interest maintains that children’s
interests cannot be studied in isolation from their fluid and constantly forming
identities, and are situated in a social, cultural and historical context. Such
interests and identities are positional, and are often developed and enacted in
accordance with major structural divisions in society. Interests also emerge in
response to discourses, in the context of the cultural worlds in which we
engage. Viewing science interest in these terms has particular methodological
implications, and this study utilises the Mosaic approach (Clark and Moss,
2011), a multi-methods data generation technique designed to listen to
children’s perspectives on their lives, which acknowledges adults and children
as co-constructors of knowledge and understanding. In a study spanning two
years, I generated data with eight children in their first years at school, from
ages 5 to 7. Using the lens of a practice theory of interest in order to
recognise and explore the social situatedness of children’s relationship with
science, this study examines the symbolic meaning of their interests and the
cultural signs and tools they use to story themselves, and how they are storied
by others. The findings indicate that children’s science interests are deeply
embedded in family and school practices, and that children express interest in
specific aspects of science, which are noticed (and encouraged) by parents, but
less so by school staff. It concludes that the format of school appears to be
constraining, so that certain stories cannot be told, this has implications for
practice.
