Title: Towards an intersectional approach to creative writing
Authors: Season Butler
ID: openalex.W2964996040
URL: 

E M Forster’s now-famous distinction between flat and round characters has
become a widely accepted feature of creative writing practice and pedagogy, and
of literary analysis. In this thesis, Forster’s notion of roundness is a major
point of departure, synthesised with the key features of intersectionality.
Arising from its coinage in feminist legal theory, intersectionality appreciates
identity as a matrix of simultaneous, mutually reinforcing points of privilege
or marginalisation, for example, how Black women experience the double
oppressions of racism and misogyny, or how class status complicates racial
privilege. Intersectionality takes a particular interest in socially
marginalised voices and the structures of dominance and oppression which
maintain uneven social power dynamics. An intersectional approach to creative
writing can serve the aesthetic interests of a work by using the political
dimension of characters’ lives to greater effect. Intersectionality can also
challenge certain unspoken conventions in creative writing practice, such as the
tendency to leave race – and particularly whiteness – unmarked, a move which
passively reinforces the conflation of whiteness (and other normative
identities) with the ‘universal’. This thesis explores four contemporary, US
coming-of-age novels which confront or confound some of these conventions by
making political subject positions (here we look at race, gender, class and
sexuality) more visible and active in character and plot formation. The
practical element of this thesis demonstrates the execution of an intersectional
approach. Cygnet is coming-of-age literary fiction told from the geographic and
political margins, following a protagonist at the intersection of subordinated
race, gender, class and age (youth). She lives temporarily in a diverse
community defined by their marginalisation on the basis of old age. Her
emergence into adulthood is burdened by her socio-economic position, lack of
support structures and the particular vulnerability of marginalised people to
the effects of climate change.
