Title: Cultural Ecosystem of the Seediq’s Traditional Weaving Techniques—A Comparison of the Learning Differences Between Urban and Indigenous Communities
Authors: Shyh-Huei Hwang, Hsiu-Mei Huang
ID: openalex.W2920880594
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/su11061519

The Seediq tribe is one of Taiwan’s Indigenous peoples, and they have very
traditional weaving techniques. Women of the Seediq weave clothes and quilts for
their families as they believe that only women with good weaving skill can pass
through the Rainbow Bridge and be reunited with ancestors after they die.
However, due to changing society, there is little demand for weaving today, and
the norms observed by their ancestors are gradually disappearing, resulting in
the declining number of locals capable of weaving. The weaving techniques of
these Indigenous people are on the verge of disappearing. Unfortunately, when
the government took measures to preserve the techniques by registering Seta
Bakan as the preserver of intangible cultural heritage, and launched training
classes to save such techniques, no locals were initially interested in learning
weaving. After non-Seediq people were allowed to participate in learning, the
course attracted weaving lovers from all over the island. The course included
five learning phases within four years, which were given in urban communities.
In the fourth year, the weaving teacher was invited to carry out a course to
teach in her Indigenous village. Both courses have the same teacher teaching the
same techniques. However, the perceptions and feelings of learning vary among
members of different cultural backgrounds. UNESCO has extended the protection of
intangible cultural heritage from technical objects to the maintenance and
inheritance of community, thus, this study focuses on the interaction and
feeling of students during the weaving courses given in two communities,
analyzes how the differences of feeling and cultural background influence the
learning perceptions of the students of the two communities, and examines the
significance and functions of rebuilding the cultural ecosystem for the
sustainable inheritance of skills. The conclusion of this study is that urban
communities learn weaving purposefully because they have no cultural or
technical background, while the courses for indigenous communities feature the
frequent recurrence of traditional “old value”. The different learning
motivations, feelings, and perceptions of the two communities can be
complementary and mutually supportive to each other. After exploring the
cultural context, this study finds that the cultural ecosystem generated by
indigenous weavers includes Gaya belief, Natural knowledge, Indigenous
languages, Personal practice, Generational links, and Social interaction, which
are strongly bound to each other. However, social changes can weaken or even
break the cultural ecosystem; the learning courses of the two communities create
opportunities for re-connection. Native tribes are the best field to build an
ideal cultural ecosystem; while the urban communities play the role of an
acupuncture massage stick that stimulates the ethnic consciousness and learning
motivation of Indigenous peoples, which preserves and provides the techniques
and external knowledge. Admittedly these two communities contribute to cultural
inheritance, respectively. The analysis of this study provides an important
reference for the feasible routes of carrying forward indigenous techniques on
the brink of disappearing in the current society of cultural initiative, and
provides the opportunity for reconnecting cultural ecosystem through technique
acquisition.
