Title: Foundations of peace and harmony in families and communities: Insights from a TRUST, LEARN and CARE (TLC) framework
Authors: Alan L. Hayes, Margaret Freestone, Jamin Day
ID: openalex.W2993077942
URL: https://doi.org/10.14421/skijic.v2i2.1510

In a world riven by conflict, violent extremism and sectarian animosities, peace
is in short supply. Promoting peace is, however, central to the great traditions
of faith, including Islam. Contrary to their core precepts, fear, hatred and
envy drive an evil mis-construal of the core tenets of these religions; the
antithesis of their fundamental commitment to the promotion of tolerance, care
and compassion. Contemporary events defy comprehension and highlight the urgent
need to find ways, especially within families and the communities in which they
live, to counter radicalisation. Families, after all, ought to be key contexts
for promoting dialogue, understanding and peace, consistent with the precepts of
the Abrahamic religious traditions, and the Qur’anic focus on families that sees
them as the forum for fulfilling the basic Islamic foundations of peace. Strong
families build capable, caring and compassionate communities. The present paper
briefly outlines a three-element model that might be usefully applied to better
understand the processes of development of prosocial attitudes, beliefs and
behaviours that are so vital for peaceful, constructive and compassionate co-
existence; attributes that are so vitally needed in an increasingly multi-
cultural, multi-ethnic and multi-faith world. The elements are encapsulated in
three conceptually linked acronyms: TRUST; LEARN; CARE or TLC. The trust, learn,
care (TLC) framework has been developed from key principles in the new
discipline of family studies. Global changes present many challenges for
families and communities. This article concludes that a peaceful and harmonious
future will be built on the foundations for dialogue and understanding that
start in families and communities. Trust and tolerance, learning and teaching,
caring and compassion are at the heart of acceptance of diversity, growth of
understanding and promotion of respect for cultures, religions and beliefs.
