Title: Examining the use of picture books in preschool education institutions
Authors: Atiye Adak Özdemir, Filiz Hıdır, Burcu Özdemir Beceren
ID: openalex.W2955597823
URL: https://doi.org/10.17263/jlls.586235

Please fill up the following information accurately. (Please use Times New
Roman, 12 pt. Examining the use of picture books in preschool education
institutions The present study aims to examine the use of picture books in
preschool classes. Case Study, a qualitative research method, was employed as
the research method. The data were collected through video recording, semi-
structured interviews, and documents. They were analyzed by means of document
and descriptive analysis techniques. The research findings revealed that the
books in the classes were generally composed of the picture books in the form of
series and fairy tale books. Teachers participating in this study thought that
books were not sufficient in most classes and that in addition to the books
present in the classes, there should be more books related to science. The
research findings showed that when children are read informative picture books,
they display more distracted behavior compared to when narrative picture books
are read. However, when examined in general, distracted behavior by children
while the teacher reads were understood to be associated more with the
strategies that the teacher uses while reading. The most remarkable finding of
the study was that the teachers made a limited eye contact with the children
while story reading, they did not adjust their tones according to the characters
and carry out an activity except asking questions about the story in the post-
story reading process. Information about Author(s)* Author 1 Author (Last name,
First name) Adak Özdemir, Atiye Affiliated institution (University) Pamukkale
University Country Turkey Email address aadak@pau.edu.tr Department & Rank
Corresponding author (Yes/No) Write only one corresponding author. Author 2
Author (Last name, First name) Hıdır, Filiz Affiliated institution (University)
Pamukkale University Country Turkey Email address fturkseven@pau.edu.tr
Department & Rank Corresponding author (Yes/No) Author 3 Author (Last name,
First name) Özdemir Beceren, Burcu Affiliated institution (University) Çanakkale
Onsekiz Mart University Country Turkey Email address burcubeceren@comu.edu.tr
Department & Rank Corresponding author (Yes/No) Author 4 Author (Last name,
First name) Affiliated institution (University) Country Email address Department
& Rank Corresponding author (Yes/No)
