Title: Exploring young people’s views and experiences of relationship abuse: and the role of education in framing this perspective.
Authors: Shu Cole
ID: openalex.W2922227589
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10871/35967

This thesis investigates young women’s experiences of domestic violence and
abuse within teenage heterosexual relationships and the role of education in
understanding these experiences. Domestic violence and abuse has often been
defined and located as an adult issue. However, there is increasing awareness
that young people experience greater levels of violence and abuse in their
relationships, from as young as thirteen (Barter et al 2009); with comparable
deleterious effects as for older women. This research focuses on young women
(all under the age of nineteen) who were at school when they experienced
violence and abuse in their romantic relationships. The research utilises a
theoretical framework which draws on insights from feminist post-structural
approaches to gender and sexuality. It does so in order to explore the
discourses available to young women with which to make sense of their experience
of relationships in a context of violence and abuse. It also seeks to explore
the young women’s experience of education, both formal and informal; the role it
played, and the role it could have played. There is a dearth of empirical
research that has explored, in depth, young women’s experiences of violence and
abuse, and subsequently, little is known about the ways in which they understand
and make sense of their experiences. This research adopted a feminist narrative
approach to the interviewing in order to allow the young women participating in
the research to give voice to their experiences of violence and abuse in the
context of their education. The discourses the young women drew on in order to
narrate and explain their experiences reflect dominant heteronormative
discourses of love. Their ‘stories’ were supported by narratives which were
infused by popular culture – these were hierarchically gendered in nature and
appeared to perpetuate inequality in a way which simultaneously allowed violence
and abuse to remain hidden amongst dominant ‘practices of love’ (Donovan &
Hester, 2015). From my analysis this included experiences of pregnancy and
motherhood which were weaponised and bound up with gendered power relationships
and complex experiences of love. The research presented here will argue that
these young women’s narratives were at times incoherent, as they worked to find
ways to understand their experiences in an apparently limited and confining
heteronormative framework. This ‘identity work’ is recognised as part of their
attempts to reproduce, resist and rupture discourse, and goes some way in
explaining the contradictory and fragmentary nature of these stories. A
particularly pertinent focus of the research was the focus on education, and the
fact that these young women’s experiences were explored within their broader
educational context (and both in terms of informal and formal educational
arrangements). This educational exploration was also important because of the
means in which it has allowed for an understanding of the ways education has
frustrated their understandings rather than used as a space to challenge their
experiences and disrupt confining discourses, however, it also highlighted the
ways in which education might be able to transform young people’s experiences,
understandings and their constructions of relationships.
