Title: El “chico malote” y la “chica responsable”: modelos aspiracionales y representaciones juveniles en las teen series españolas
Authors: María-José Masanet, Maddalena Fedele
ID: openalex.W2922132142
URL: https://doi.org/10.5294/pacla.2019.22.2.5

El “chico malote” y la “chica responsable”: modelos aspiracionales y
representaciones juveniles en las teen series españolasO "menino mau" e a
"menina responsável": modelos aspiracionais e representações juvenis nas séries
adolescentes espanholasThe purpose of this article is to identify and analyze
the role models of teenagers featured in Spanish teen series and regarded as
favorites by this target. For this, two studies are combined: One of audiences
conducted with 787 students from Barcelona, and focused on the analysis of
gender differences when choosing and appreciating teen characters, and one of
qualitative content, centered on the examination of the characters selected as
preferred by the teenagers surveyed on the first stage. Results show that the
teenagers interviewed tended to choose and appreciate male and female characters
of teen series based on gender: firstly, both boys and girls mostly chose male
characters as their favorites; secondly, male characters were mainly chosen
because they are “rebellious”, “fun” and “bad boys with good background,” while
female characters were mainly chosen for being “good” and “brave and
determined.” The qualitative analysis confirms that male characters are
rebellious, bad boys with good background, whereas female characters are
responsible, attractive girls. Thus, Spanish teen series build a female sphere,
associated with responsibility and sensitivity, and a male one, rebellious and
virile. While there are also exceptions —more complex, nuance-rich characters—,
they are a minority. These results warn us about the need to represent more
plural and complex characters that move away from classic stereotypes that end
up perpetuating gender differences.Para citar este artículo / to reference this
article / para citar este artigoMasanet, M-J. y Fedele, M. (2019). El “chico
malote” y la “chica responsable”: modelos aspiracionales y representaciones
juveniles en las teen series españolas. Palabra Clave, 22(2), e.2019.22.2.5.
DOI: 10.5294/pacla.2019.22.2.5Recibido: 04/02/2018Aceptado: 09/04/2018
