Title: The Status of Older Adult Care in Contemporary Ghana: A Profile of Some Emerging Issues
Authors: Delali A. Dovie
ID: openalex.W2935842995
URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fsoc.2019.00025

The paper examines how the healthcare and social care pillars of social policy
for aging societies shape inequalities in health and well-being at old age,
utilizing qualitative and quantitative datasets. The results intimate the lack
of geriatric infrastructure, hence the inadequacy of geriatric care provision
for older adults. Systemic problems or gaps existent in Ghana led to private
individuals taking advantage of the situation, turning it into an opportunity
for service providers. Thus, the evolution of recreational/residential homes in
Ghana is situated along three distinct patterns or forms namely the occasional,
the adult day care center and residential archetypes. Collectively, these
constitute formal and informal care facilities. These are often privately owned
and at a cost. The nature of quality of care may be affected by the types of
homes available, especially in the globalized cultural setting. A growing number
of older adults resort to care homes as an alternative measure. These are
discussed from two viewpoints. First, geriatric data generation, the absence of
which impedes healthcare provision. Second, cash-for-care policies may
exacerbate existing inequalities in care with negative consequences for health
and well-being. In short, policies for aging populations are being implemented
across Ghana with too little known about their consequences for inequalities in
health and well-being in later life. The paper sought to address this knowledge
gap by exploring a significant infrastructure by undertaking a systematic
examination of how recent policy developments for aging exacerbate or reduce
inequalities in health and well-being among older adults. The paper concludes
that social policy for aging societies' specific key pillars (healthcare and
social care research) offers opportunities for analyzing and understanding
internal dynamics including the effects of policy implementation for
inequalities in health and well-being at older ages, therefore enabling the
identification of strategies to improve older adults' circumstances, without
which older adult population will far outpace elder care provision.
