Title: Evolutionary Theories and Men's Preferences for Women's Waist-to-Hip Ratio: Which Hypotheses Remain? A Systematic Review
Authors: Jeanne Bovet
ID: openalex.W2948146511
URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01221

Over the last 25 years, a large amount of research has been dedicated to
identifying men's preferences for women's physical features, and the
evolutionary benefits associated with such preferences. Today, this area of
research generates substantial controversy and criticism. I argue that part of
the crisis is due to inaccuracies in the evolutionary hypotheses used in the
field. For this review, I focus on the extensive literature regarding men's
adaptive preferences for women's waist-to-hip ratio (WHR), which has become a
classic example of the just-so storytelling contributing to the general mistrust
toward evolutionary explanations of human behavior. The issues in this
literature originate in the vagueness and incompleteness of the theorizing of
the evolutionary mechanisms leading to mate preferences. Authors seem to have
rushed into testing and debating the effects of WHR on women's attractiveness
under various conditions and using different stimuli, without first establishing
(a) clear definitions of the central evolution concepts (e.g., female mate value
is often reduced to an imprecise concept of "health-and-fertility"), and (b) a
complete overview of the distinct evolutionary paths potentially at work (e.g.,
focusing on fecundability while omitting descendants' quality). Unsound
theoretical foundations will lead to imprecise predictions which cannot properly
be tested, thus ultimately resulting in the premature rejection of an
evolutionary explanation to human mate preferences. This paper provides the
first comprehensive review of the existing hypotheses on why men's preferences
for a certain WHR in women might be adaptive, as well as an analysis of the
theoretical credibility of these hypotheses. By dissecting the evolutionary
reasoning behind each hypothesis, I show which hypotheses are plausible and
which are unfit to account for men's preferences for female WHR. Moreover, the
most cited hypotheses (e.g., WHR as a cue of health or fecundity) are found to
not necessarily be the ones with the strongest theoretical support, and some
promising hypotheses (e.g., WHR as a cue of parity or current pregnancy) have
seemingly been mostly overlooked. Finally, I suggest some directions for future
studies on human mate choice, to move this evolutionary psychology literature
toward a stronger theoretical foundation.
