Title: Adolescents’ Identity Formation: Linking the Narrative and the Dual-Cycle Approach
Authors: Lotte van Doeselaar, Kate C. McLean, Wim Meeus, Jaap J. A. Denissen, Theo A. Klimstra
ID: openalex.W2967209605
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10964-019-01096-x

The narrative and dual-cycle approach conceptualize and operationalize
adolescents' identity formation in different ways. While the narrative approach
focuses on the construction of an autobiographical life story, the dual-cycle
approach focuses on the formation of identity commitments. Although these
approaches have different emphases, they are conceptually complementary. Yet,
their empirical links and distinctions have only scarcely been investigated.
Empirical knowledge on these links in adolescence and across time has been
especially lacking. In the present research, it was therefore examined whether
key characteristics of adolescents' narration (autobiographical reasoning and
agency) were concurrently and prospectively related to engagement in the dual-
cycle processes of commitment making, identification with commitment,
exploration in breadth, exploration in depth, and ruminative exploration. The
findings from a cross-sectional sample of 1,580 Dutch adolescents
(M<sub>age</sub> = 14.7 years, 56% female) demonstrated that autobiographical
reasoning was significantly positively associated with the commitment and more
adaptive exploration processes (i.e., in breadth and in depth). In addition,
agency was significantly positively associated with the commitment processes and
exploration in depth. Yet, these associations between the narrative
characteristics and dual-cycle processes were only weak. Subsequently, the
findings from a two-year longitudinal subsample (n = 242, M<sub>age</sub> = 14.7
years, 62% female) indicated that on average commitment strength remained stable
but exploration increased across middle adolescence. A stronger increase in
identification with commitment and adaptive exploration (i.e., in breadth and in
depth) was predicted by a higher degree of agency in adolescents' narratives.
Overall, these findings indicate that both approaches to identity formation are
associated, but the small size of these associations suggests that they
predominantly capture unique aspects of identity formation. Both approaches
could thus complement and inform each other.
