Title: A New Literacy Coach and Two English Language Arts Teachers Learn Together: A Narrative Inquiry
Authors: Christiana C Succar
ID: openalex.W2952297871
URL: https://scholarcommons.usf.edu/etd/7960

Literacy coaching is not new to education. Since the 2001 shift in the United
States (U.S.) educational policy towards high-quality teacher training,
accountability, and student achievement, literacy or reading coach positions
have been a core part of the educational institution (U. S. Department of
Education, 2003). However, with undefined coaching roles and inadequate coach
training early in the initiative, minimal impact on effective teacher
development and instructional shifts towards closing the achievement gap
occurred (Dole, 2003; International Reading Association, 2004).\nIn the past ten
years, more understanding of literacy coaches’ roles and responsibilities has
occurred with the publication of numerous manuals focused on coaching as well as
education for coaches. For example, Toll (2014) defines literacy coaches as
“partners with teachers for job-embedded professional learning that enhances
teachers’ reflection on students, the curriculum and pedagogy…” (p. 10).
Literacy coaches recognize an essential role of coaching is collaboration and
partnerships with teachers. For these relationships to happen, coaches must
build connections with teachers. Thus, coaches must know adult learning theory
and have strong interpersonal skills (Toll, 2014). However, scant empirical
evidence is available regarding how coaches must build collaborative
relationships as well as navigate other professional identities (Rainville &amp;
Jones, 2008) and responsive/directive distinctions between administration,
teachers, and district initiatives (Ippolito, 2010).\nThis study adds to the
extant literature using a narrative inquiry approach. I share a personal
narrative of my lived experience as a new literacy coach along with two early-
career English language arts (ELA) teachers as together; we navigated through
their and my teacher practices of planning, teaching, collaboration, and
building a professional learning community. As suggested by Clandinin (2013)
regarding narrative inquiry, I did not devise A Priori questions to guide my
study. Instead, following Clandinin’s idea about Wonderments, I sought to find
answers guided by the following Wonderments:\n•\tIn what ways do I, as a
literacy coach, navigate my roles and responsibilities to build partnerships
with two ELA teachers?\n•\tIn what ways do I, as a literacy coach, establish
collaboration among these two teachers to build a professional learning
community?\n•\tIn what ways do these two teachers’ beliefs influence my
coaching, modeling, and relationship building?\nI grounded this narrative
inquiry in the tenets of social constructivism (Ben &amp; Kosnik, 2006),
sociocultural theory (Bruner 1990; Vygotsky, 1978), constructivism (Dewey, 1916,
1933; Piaget, 1954; Vygotsky, 1978), and change theory (Fullan, 2001, 2006).
