Title: Augmented Reality in Educational Inclusion. A Systematic Review on the Last Decade
Authors: Jairo Quintero, Silvia Baldiris, Rainer Rubira García, Jhoni Cerón, Gloria Vélez
ID: openalex.W2964310604
URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01835

The use of Augmented Reality (AR) to achieve educational inclusion has been not
deeply explored. This systematic review describes the current state of using AR
as an educational technology that takes into consideration the needs of all
students including those with a disability. It is done through the analysis of
factors, such as the advantages of AR, its limitations, uses, challenges, its
scope in the educational field, the attended population and the positive or
negative effects of its use in learning scenarios that involve students with
diverse educational needs. A total of 50 studies between 2008 and 2018 were
analyzed through searching in three interdisciplinary databases: Scopus, Web of
Science, and Springer link. For this, the methodological stages considered were
planning the review, search, analysis of literature and results report. After
analyzing the results, it was possible to demonstrate that the use of AR for
inclusive education in the field of sciences is where more studies have been
conducted. In regard to the population with disabilities, among the most
representative advantages reported were the motivation, interaction and
generating interest on the part of the student. At the same time, an important
methodological limitation identified was the size of the sample; some
investigations were done with two or three subjects, some studies Single Subject
Designs were found. In terms of the population attended, the studies generally
included students with different impairments (hearing, visual, motor or
cognitive), minorities (ethnic, vulnerable), leaving aside other groups excluded
as exceptional talents and immigrants, which could be explored in the future.
Despite different problems to be addressed, few frameworks to the diversity
attention in education were reported, and there was no model and methodology in
inclusive education considered in the studies. Finally, from this review we have
identified open issues that could give rise to new research in the subject of
using AR to favor the creation of inclusive learning scenarios.
