Title: Seven HCI Grand Challenges
Authors: Constantine Stephanidis, Gavriel Salvendy, Margherita Antona, Jessie Y. C. Chen, Jianming Dong
ID: openalex.W2954457885
URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2019.1619259

Published with license by Taylor &amp; Francis Group, LLC. This article aims to
investigate the Grand Challenges which arise in the current and emerging
landscape of rapid technological evolution towards more intelligent interactive
technologies, coupled with increased and widened societal needs, as well as
individual and collective expectations that HCI, as a discipline, is called upon
to address. A perspective oriented to humane and social values is adopted,
formulating the challenges in terms of the impact of emerging intelligent
interactive technologies on human life both at the individual and societal
levels. Seven Grand Challenges are identified and presented in this article:
Human-Technology Symbiosis; Human-Environment Interactions; Ethics, Privacy and
Security; Well-being, Health and Eudaimonia; Accessibility and Universal Access;
Learning and Creativity; and Social Organization and Democracy. Although not
exhaustive, they summarize the views and research priorities of an international
interdisciplinary group of experts, reflecting different scientific
perspectives, methodological approaches and application domains. Each identified
Grand Challenge is analyzed in terms of: concept and problem definition; main
research issues involved and state of the art; and associated emerging
requirements. BACKGROUND This article presents the results of the collective
effort of a group of 32 experts involved in the community of the Human Computer
Interaction International (HCII) Conference series. The group’s collaboration
started in early 2018 with the collection of opinions from all group members,
each asked to independently list and describe five HCI grand challenges. During
a one-day meeting held on the 20th July 2018 in the context of the HCI
International 2018 Conference in Las Vegas, USA, the identified topics were
debated and challenges were formulated in terms of the impact of emerging
intelligent interactive technologies on human life both at the individual and
societal levels. Further analysis and consolidation led to a set of seven Grand
Challenges presented herein. This activity was organized and supported by the
HCII Conference series.
