Title: Over Time and Beyond Disney—Visualizing Princesses through a Comparative Study in India, Fiji, and Sweden
Authors: Charu Uppal
ID: openalex.W2928907138
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/socsci8040105

Disney animated princesses are broadcasted around the world through Disney
Channel and its global affiliates as well as through numerous other networks
that purchase distribution rights. In an attempt to provide diversity in the
last 25 years, Disney has featured nonwestern princesses such as those in
Aladdin (1992), Pocahontas (1995), Mulan (1998), and Moana (2016). This study
examines how princesses in animated Disney movies are perceived and understood
by girls (8–15 years) in three different countries, over two time-periods with a
gap of nearly a decade (2009 and 2018). The primary research question,
considering Disney’s global reach, is how race, culture, and presence of a royal
family interact with transnational access to the same media content in the
perception of the princess concept and about being a girl. The selected
countries provide an opportunity to explore differences in perception of Disney
princesses between girls raised in countries with and without a royal family,
and between girls in nonwestern and western countries. Differences in the
perception are attributed to local and national cultures that allow a different
lens to view the same content. A mixed method combining interviews, focus
groups, and participant-generated images was used to gather data in India, Fiji,
and Sweden. Results indicate Disney princesses, with their ubiquitous presence
in various formats, e.g., media content, costumes and school stationery, have
created a uniform idea of beauty across countries. Princesses in Disney were
perceived by participants as being Caucasian and American, regardless of the
race or country they represented. Girls in India and Fiji did not identify with
Jasmine or Mulan, whom they considered ‘American’, whereas girls in Sweden
considered Jasmine and Mulan as princesses of nonwestern origin. Girls in India
and Fiji did not think they could be princesses because of their skin color, and
did not want to lead a life ‘restricted with responsibilities’, but girls in
Sweden considered the same question from the place of a choice, i.e., they
preferred not to lead a ‘boring’ and regulated life like that of a princess.
Participants from Fiji, with the least access to domestic programming that
showed girls of their same Fijian origin, were least likely to consider
themselves capable of being a princess.
