Title: New drugs and stock market: how to predict pharma market reaction to clinical trial announcements
Authors: Semen Budennyy, Alexey Kazakov, Elizaveta Kovtun, Leonid Zhukov
ID: 2208.07248
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.07248

Pharmaceutical companies operate in a strictly regulated and highly risky
environment in which a single slip can lead to serious financial implications.
Accordingly, the announcements of clinical trial results tend to determine the
future course of events, hence being closely monitored by the public. In this
work, we provide statistical evidence for the result promulgation influence on
the public pharma market value. Whereas most works focus on retrospective impact
analysis, the present research aims to predict the numerical values of
announcement-induced changes in stock prices. For this purpose, we develop a
pipeline that includes a BERT-based model for extracting sentiment polarity of
announcements, a Temporal Fusion Transformer for forecasting the expected
return, a graph convolution network for capturing event relationships, and
gradient boosting for predicting the price change. The challenge of the problem
lies in inherently different patterns of responses to positive and negative
announcements, reflected in a stronger and more pronounced reaction to the
negative news. Moreover, such phenomenon as the drop in stocks after the
positive announcements affirms the counterintuitiveness of the price behavior.
Importantly, we discover two crucial factors that should be considered while
working within a predictive framework. The first factor is the drug portfolio
size of the company, indicating the greater susceptibility to an announcement in
the case of small drug diversification. The second one is the network effect of
the events related to the same company or nosology. All findings and insights
are gained on the basis of one of the biggest FDA (the Food and Drug
Administration) announcement datasets, consisting of 5436 clinical trial
announcements from 681 companies over the last five years.
