Title: DePAint: A Decentralized Safe Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning Algorithm considering Peak and Average Constraints
Authors: Raheeb Hassan, K. M. Shadman Wadith, Md. Mamun or Rashid, Md. Mosaddek Khan
ID: 2310.14348
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.14348

The domain of safe multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), despite its
potential applications in areas ranging from drone delivery and vehicle
automation to the development of zero-energy communities, remains relatively
unexplored. The primary challenge involves training agents to learn optimal
policies that maximize rewards while adhering to stringent safety constraints,
all without the oversight of a central controller. These constraints are
critical in a wide array of applications. Moreover, ensuring the privacy of
sensitive information in decentralized settings introduces an additional layer
of complexity, necessitating innovative solutions that uphold privacy while
achieving the system's safety and efficiency goals. In this paper, we address
the problem of multi-agent policy optimization in a decentralized setting, where
agents communicate with their neighbors to maximize the sum of their cumulative
rewards while also satisfying each agent's safety constraints. We consider both
peak and average constraints. In this scenario, there is no central controller
coordinating the agents and both the rewards and constraints are only known to
each agent locally/privately. We formulate the problem as a decentralized
constrained multi-agent Markov Decision Problem and propose a momentum-based
decentralized policy gradient method, DePAint, to solve it. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first privacy-preserving fully decentralized multi-agent
reinforcement learning algorithm that considers both peak and average
constraints. We then provide theoretical analysis and empirical evaluation of
our algorithm in a number of scenarios and compare its performance to
centralized algorithms that consider similar constraints.
