Title: LLM as OS, Agents as Apps: Envisioning AIOS, Agents and the AIOS-Agent Ecosystem
Authors: Yingqiang Ge, Yujie Ren, Wenyue Hua, Shuyuan Xu, Juntao Tan et al.
ID: 2312.03815
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.03815

Abstract:
This paper envisions a revolutionary AIOS-Agent ecosystem, where Large Language
Model (LLM) serves as the (Artificial) Intelligent Operating System (IOS, or
AIOS)--an operating system "with soul". Upon this foundation, a diverse range of
LLM-based AI Agent Applications (Agents, or AAPs) are developed, enriching the
AIOS-Agent ecosystem and signaling a paradigm shift from the traditional OS-APP
ecosystem. We envision that LLM's impact will not be limited to the AI
application level, instead, it will in turn revolutionize the design and
implementation of computer system, architecture, software, and programming
language, featured by several main concepts: LLM as OS (system-level), Agents as
Applications (application-level), Natural Language as Programming Interface
(user-level), and Tools as Devices/Libraries (hardware/middleware-level). We
begin by introducing the architecture of traditional OS. Then we formalize a
conceptual framework for AIOS through "LLM as OS (LLMOS)", drawing analogies
between AIOS and traditional OS: LLM is likened to OS kernel, context window to
memory, external storage to file system, hardware tools to peripheral devices,
software tools to programming libraries, and user prompts to user commands.
Subsequently, we introduce the new AIOS-Agent Ecosystem, where users can easily
program Agent Applications (AAPs) using natural language, democratizing the
development of software, which is different from the traditional OS-APP
ecosystem. Following this, we explore the diverse scope of Agent Applications.
We delve into both single-agent and multi-agent systems, as well as human-agent
interaction. Lastly, drawing on the insights from traditional OS-APP ecosystem,
we propose a roadmap for the evolution of the AIOS-Agent ecosystem. This roadmap
is designed to guide the future research and development, suggesting systematic
progresses of AIOS and its Agent applications.
