Title: Harnessing Pre-trained Generalist Agents for Software Engineering Tasks
Authors: Paulina Stevia Nouwou Mindom, Amin Nikanjam, Foutse Khomh
ID: 2312.15536
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.15536

Nowadays, we are witnessing an increasing adoption of Artificial Intelligence
(AI) to develop techniques aimed at improving the reliability, effectiveness,
and overall quality of software systems. Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has
recently been successfully used for automation in complex tasks such as game
testing and solving the job-shop scheduling problem. However, these specialized
DRL agents, trained from scratch on specific tasks, suffer from a lack of
generalizability to other tasks and they need substantial time to be developed
and re-trained effectively. Recently, DRL researchers have begun to develop
generalist agents, able to learn a policy from various environments and capable
of achieving performances similar to or better than specialist agents in new
tasks. In the Natural Language Processing or Computer Vision domain, these
generalist agents are showing promising adaptation capabilities to never-before-
seen tasks after a light fine-tuning phase and achieving high performance. This
paper investigates the potential of generalist agents for solving SE tasks.
Specifically, we conduct an empirical study aimed at assessing the performance
of two generalist agents on two important SE tasks: the detection of bugs in
games (for two games) and the minimization of makespan in a scheduling task, to
solve the job-shop scheduling problem (for two instances). Our results show that
the generalist agents outperform the specialist agents with very little effort
for fine-tuning, achieving a 20% reduction of the makespan over specialized
agent performance on task-based scheduling. In the context of game testing, some
generalist agent configurations detect 85% more bugs than the specialist agents.
Building on our analysis, we provide recommendations for researchers and
practitioners looking to select generalist agents for SE tasks, to ensure that
they perform effectively.
