Title: Study protocol for a pragmatic evaluation of the Worcestershire Meeting Centre Programme for people affected by dementia
Authors: None
ID: socarxiv.qt3em_v1
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/socarxiv.qt3em_v1

Background: Pragmatic evaluation can assess whether complex health programmes
have the desired effects (or not), as well as understand how effects are caused
across real-world contexts. This is critical when scaling programmes because of
increasing components and contexts that create methodological, political, and
practical challenges. This paper reports the protocol for a pragmatic evaluation
of a scaling programme referred to as the Worcestershire Meeting Centres
Programme [WMCP]. WMCP aims to increase the availability of the Meeting Centre
intervention for people affected by dementia across a county of England.
Methods: The paper describes the mixed methods research framework and how it
works according to the principles of pragmatic evaluation. Three connected
research phases aim to: (1) explore change from the perspective of diverse
programme stakeholders; (2) measure change to establish impact; and (3)
monetarily account programmes costs and benefits to estimate the programmes
Social Return on Investment [SROI]. Ethical considerations are discussed from
the perspective of people affected by dementia. The purposeful sampling
approach, and qualitative and quantitative research methods to be used are
discussed.  Dissemination: The protocol provides a real-world example of how
programme complexity as well as effectiveness/cost-effectiveness may be
understood using SROI, including the data collection and analysis methods that
can be drawn from in the process. This is the first paper that considers and
maps SROI according to the principles of pragmatic evaluation. Results will
develop on limited evidence of scaling costs and outcomes in a contextually
sensitive way that is needed in dementia. Dissemination will be focused on
programme improvement through ongoing reporting to programme funder and
providers. Local Authorities interested in the programme will be informed about
the research to influence evidence-based translation practices. An intervention
description and results papers will be presented at conferences and published in
peer reviewed and open access journals.
