Title: Dementia Care Coordinators:  A service evaluation into the successes and challenges of the Kent and Medway ICB Pilot Project
Authors: None
ID: socarxiv.c4gdy_v1
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/socarxiv.c4gdy_v1

Background: In July 2021, Kent and Medway ICB (UK) funded nine Dementia Care
Coordinator (DCC) posts to improve care for people with dementia and their
families. This as a pilot project where each DCC was assigned to a Primary Care
Network (collection of GP practices covering 30,000 -50,000 people). Following
the end of the pilot, DCCs were invited to participate in a focus group to
explore successes and challenges. This report presents findings from the focus
group.  Methods: Nine DCCs were invited to engage in this study. Three DCCs
provided informed consent and attended a 90 minute online focus group. Data were
subsequently transcribed and analysed using thematic analysis which is a
rigorous analytical approach to qualitative data.  Findings: Findings indicate
that, according to DCCs, the service appears to reduce anxiety and worry amongst
people living with dementia and their carers across all points of the dementia
journey. Knowing that a key point of contact is available to them means that
when they notice a change in their wellbeing, they may feel more inclined to
contact an impartial, non-clinical individual for signposting. In the meantime,
DCCs weave webs of care around people living with dementia so to provide the
best possible support. DCCs found it challenging at times to: (1) work with GPs;
(2) to support people living with dementia whilst also living alone; (3) manage
service user and carer expectations about their role and: (4) to manage their
growing patient lists and workload.  Conclusions: Overall, to ensure a
sustainable service, key recommendations in need of further exploration include:
(1) ensuring buy in from key stakeholders, specifically GPs; (2) facilitating
staff support and training including clinical supervision/ observations, and:
(3) ensuring the service is adequately staffed to protect staff workload and
ensure sufficient capacity to enable delivery of high-quality care to service
users. A larger scale evaluation is currently underway, due to be completed in
October 2024 (see Abrams et al., 2023 for further details).
