Title: The impact of cooperation under climate constraints: an Agent-Based Model for exploring Paleolithic behavioral adaptations in the Inner Asian Mountain Corridor
Authors: None
ID: socarxiv.h5enj_v1
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/socarxiv.h5enj_v1

Modern humans dispersed throughout the entire world during the Pleistocene,
completing an important part of our evolutionary history. One of the most
difficult territories to be colonized by humans was Central Asia, a region
characterized by cold and arid climates and by stark geographic contrasts, such
as high mountains flanked by deserts. Central Asia therefore offers an ideal
context for testing hypotheses about the role of human behavior in dispersals
under adverse conditions.  We introduce here an evolutionary theoretical Agent-
Based Model exploring the effect of cooperation on dispersal under different
climate constraints in two study sub-regions, the Altai and Tian Shan Mountains.
The model uses an evolutionary framework to test cooperation dilemmas within
four theoretical climate scenarios. These are based on the average temperature
during glacial and interglacial periods. We compare how extreme climate
scenarios affect human cooperation depending on the regions and climates in
which hominins are found.  We show that: a) population size can significantly
influence pressure on the group, such that a higher population implies more
pressure to cooperate; b) cooperative behaviors are needed for survival in the
harshest conditions and c) if the initial probability of non-cooperation is
higher, then human groups will tend to be non-cooperative even if a cooperative
subgroup pushes them to cooperate. Our results demonstrate that the degree of
cooperation significantly impacts survival during periods of extreme climatic
deterioration. This finding provides valuable insight into the settlement
patterns of ancient civilizations, potentially shedding light on why Central
Asia might have been settled later than some other regions in Asia.
