Title: Security for Machine Learning-based Software Systems: a survey of threats, practices and challenges
Authors: Huaming Chen, M. Ali Babar
ID: 2201.04736
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.04736

Abstract:
The rapid development of Machine Learning (ML) has demonstrated superior
performance in many areas, such as computer vision, video and speech
recognition. It has now been increasingly leveraged in software systems to
automate the core tasks. However, how to securely develop the machine
learning-based modern software systems (MLBSS) remains a big challenge, for
which the insufficient consideration will largely limit its application in
safety-critical domains. One concern is that the present MLBSS development tends
to be rush, and the latent vulnerabilities and privacy issues exposed to
external users and attackers will be largely neglected and hard to be
identified. Additionally, machine learning-based software systems exhibit
different liabilities towards novel vulnerabilities at different development
stages from requirement analysis to system maintenance, due to its inherent
limitations from the model and data and the external adversary capabilities. The
successful generation of such intelligent systems will thus solicit dedicated
efforts jointly from different research areas, i.e., software engineering,
system security and machine learning. Most of the recent works regarding the
security issues for ML have a strong focus on the data and models, which has
brought adversarial attacks into consideration. In this work, we consider that
security for machine learning-based software systems may arise from inherent
system defects or external adversarial attacks, and the secure development
practices should be taken throughout the whole lifecycle. While machine learning
has become a new threat domain for existing software engineering practices,
there is no such review work covering the topic. Overall, we present a holistic
review regarding the security for MLBSS, which covers a systematic understanding
from a structure review of three distinct aspects in terms of security
threats...
