Title: Using Large-scale Heterogeneous Graph Representation Learning for Code Review Recommendations at Microsoft
Authors: Jiyang Zhang, Chandra Maddila, Ram Bairi, Christian Bird, Ujjwal Raizada et al.
ID: 2202.02385
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.02385

Abstract:
Code review is an integral part of any mature software development process, and
identifying the best reviewer for a code change is a well-accepted problem
within the software engineering community. Selecting a reviewer who lacks
expertise and understanding can slow development or result in more defects. To
date, most reviewer recommendation systems rely primarily on historical file
change and review information; those who changed or reviewed a file in the past
are the best positioned to review in the future. We posit that while these
approaches are able to identify and suggest qualified reviewers, they may be
blind to reviewers who have the needed expertise and have simply never
interacted with the changed files before. Fortunately, at Microsoft, we have a
wealth of work artifacts across many repositories that can yield valuable
information about our developers. To address the aforementioned problem, we
present CORAL, a novel approach to reviewer recommendation that leverages a
socio-technical graph built from the rich set of entities (developers,
repositories, files, pull requests (PRs), work items, etc.) and their
relationships in modern source code management systems. We employ a graph
convolutional neural network on this graph and train it on two and a half years
of history on 332 repositories within Microsoft. We show that CORAL is able to
model the manual history of reviewer selection remarkably well. Further, based
on an extensive user study, we demonstrate that this approach identifies
relevant and qualified reviewers who traditional reviewer recommenders miss, and
that these developers desire to be included in the review process. Finally, we
find that "classical" reviewer recommendation systems perform better on smaller
(in terms of developers) software projects while CORAL excels on larger
projects, suggesting that there is "no one model to rule them all."
