Title: Quality Characteristics of a Software Platform for Human-AI Teaming in Smart Manufacturing
Authors: Philipp Haindl, Thomas Hoch, Javier Dominguez, Julen Aperribai, Nazim Kemal Ure et al.
ID: 2205.15767
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.15767

Abstract:
As AI-enabled software systems become more prevalent in smart manufacturing,
their role shifts from a reactive to a proactive one that provides
context-specific support to machine operators. In the context of an
international research project, we develop an AI-based software platform that
shall facilitate the collaboration between human operators and manufacturing
machines. We conducted 14 structured interviews with stakeholders of the
prospective software platform in order to determine the individual relevance of
selected quality characteristics for human-AI teaming in smart manufacturing.
These characteristics include the ISO 25010:2011 standard for software quality
and AI-specific quality characteristics such as trustworthiness, explicability,
and auditability. The interviewees rated trustworthiness, functional
suitability, reliability, and security as the most important quality
characteristics for this context, and portability, compatibility, and
maintainability as the least important. Also, we observed agreement regarding
the relevance of the quality characteristics among interviewees having the same
role. On the other hand, the relevance of each quality characteristics varied
depending on the concrete use case of the prospective software platform. The
interviewees also were asked about the key success factors related to human-AI
teaming in smart manufacturing. They identified improving the production cycle,
increasing operator efficiency, reducing scrap, and reducing ergonomic risks as
key success criteria. In this paper, we also discuss metrics for measuring the
fulfillment of these quality characteristics, which we intend to operationalize
and monitor during operation of the prospective software platform.
