Title: A Methodology and Software Architecture to Support Explainability-by-Design
Authors: Trung Dong Huynh, Niko Tsakalakis, Ayah Helal, Sophie Stalla-Bourdillon, Luc Moreau
ID: 2206.06251
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.06251

Abstract:
Algorithms play a crucial role in many technological systems that control or
affect various aspects of our lives. As a result, providing explanations for
their decisions to address the needs of users and organisations is increasingly
expected by laws, regulations, codes of conduct, and the public. However, as
laws and regulations do not prescribe how to meet such expectations,
organisations are often left to devise their own approaches to explainability,
inevitably increasing the cost of compliance and good governance. Hence, we
envision Explainability-by-Design, a holistic methodology characterised by
proactive measures to include explanation capability in the design of
decision-making systems. The methodology consists of three phases: (A)
Explanation Requirement Analysis, (B) Explanation Technical Design, and (C)
Explanation Validation. This paper describes phase (B), a technical workflow to
implement explanation capability from requirements elicited by domain experts
for a specific application context. Outputs of this phase are a set of
configurations, allowing a reusable explanation service to exploit logs provided
by the target application to create provenance traces of the application's
decisions. The provenance then can be queried to extract relevant data points,
which can be used in explanation plans to construct explanations personalised to
their consumers. Following the workflow, organisations can design their
decision-making systems to produce explanations that meet the specified
requirements. To facilitate the process, we present a software architecture with
reusable components to incorporate the resulting explanation capability into an
application. Finally, we applied the workflow to two application scenarios and
measured the associated development costs. It was shown that the approach is
tractable in terms of development time, which can be as low as two hours per
sentence.
