Title: How Do Requirements Evolve During Elicitation? An Empirical Study Combining Interviews and App Store Analysis
Authors: Alessio Ferrari, Paola Spoletini, Sourav Debnath
ID: 2208.00825
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.00825

Abstract:
Requirements are elicited from the customer and other stakeholders through an
iterative process of interviews, prototyping, and other interactive sessions.
Then, requirements can be further extended, based on the analysis of the
features of competing products available on the market. Understanding how this
process takes place can help to identify the contribution of the different
elicitation phases, thereby allowing requirements analysts to better distribute
their resources. In this work, we empirically study in which way requirements
get transformed from initial ideas into documented needs, and then evolve based
on the inspiration coming from similar products. To this end, we select 30
subjects that act as requirements analysts, and we perform interview-based
elicitation sessions with a fictional customer. After the sessions, the analysts
produce a first set of requirements for the system. Then, they are required to
search similar products in the app stores, and extend the requirements, inspired
by the identified apps. The requirements documented at each step are evaluated,
to assess to which extent and in which way the initial idea evolved throughout
the process. Our results show that only between 30\% and 38\% of the
requirements produced after the interviews include content that can be fully
traced to initial customer's ideas. Furthermore, up to 42\% of the requirements
inspired by the app stores cover additional features compared to the ones
identified after the interviews. The results empirically show that requirements
are not elicited in strict sense, but actually co-created through interviews,
with analysts playing a crucial role in the process. In addition, we show
evidence that app store-inspired elicitation can be particularly beneficial to
complete the requirements.
