Title: Out of the BLEU: how should we assess quality of the Code Generation models?
Authors: Mikhail Evtikhiev, Egor Bogomolov, Yaroslav Sokolov, Timofey Bryksin
ID: 2208.03133
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.03133

Abstract:
In recent years, researchers have created and introduced a significant number of
various code generation models. As human evaluation of every new model version
is unfeasible, the community adopted automatic evaluation metrics such as BLEU
to approximate the results of human judgement. These metrics originate from the
machine translation domain and it is unclear whether they are applicable for the
code generation tasks and how well they agree with the human evaluation on this
task. There are also other metrics, CodeBLEU and RUBY, developed to estimate the
similarity of code, that take into account the properties of source code.
However, for these metrics there are hardly any studies on their agreement with
the human evaluation. Despite all that, minimal differences in the metric scores
have been used in recent papers to claim superiority of some code generation
models over the others. In this paper, we present a study on the applicability
of six metrics -- BLEU, ROUGE-L, METEOR, ChrF, CodeBLEU, and RUBY -- for
evaluation of code generation models. We conduct a study on two different code
generation datasets and use human annotators to assess the quality of all models
run on these datasets. The results indicate that for the CoNaLa dataset of
Python one-liners, none of the metrics can correctly emulate human judgement on
which model is better with >95% certainty if the difference in model scores is
less than 5 points. For the HearthStone dataset, which consists of classes of a
particular structure, a difference in model scores of at least 2 points is
enough to claim the superiority of one model over the other. Our findings
suggest that the ChrF metric is a better fit for the evaluation of code
generation models than the commonly used BLEU and CodeBLEU. Yet, finding a
metric for code generation that closely agrees with humans requires additional
work.
