Title: Developer Discussion Topics on the Adoption and Barriers of Low Code Software Development Platforms
Authors: Md Abdullah Al Alamin, Gias Uddin, Sanjay Malakar, Sadia Afroz, Tameem Bin Haider et al.
ID: 2209.00844
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.00844

Abstract:
Low-code software development (LCSD) is an emerging approach to democratize
application development for software practitioners from diverse backgrounds.
LCSD platforms promote rapid application development with a drag-and-drop
interface and minimal programming by hand. As it is a relatively new paradigm,
it is vital to study developers' difficulties when adopting LCSD platforms.
Software engineers frequently use the online developer forum Stack Overflow (SO)
to seek assistance with technical issues. We observe a growing body of
LCSD-related posts in SO. This paper presents an empirical study of around 33K
SO posts containing discussions of 38 popular LCSD platforms. We use Topic
Modeling to determine the topics discussed in those posts. Additionally, we
examine how these topics are spread across the various phases of the agile
software development life cycle (SDLC) and which part of LCSD is the most
popular and challenging. Our study offers several interesting findings. First,
we find 40 LCSD topics that we group into five categories: Application
Customization, Database, and File Management, Platform Adoption, Platform
Maintenance, and Third-party API Integration. Second, while the Application
Customization (30\%) and Data Storage (25\%) \rev{topic} categories are the most
common, inquiries relating to several other categories (e.g., the Platform
Adoption \rev{topic} category) have gained considerable attention in recent
years. Third, all topic categories are evolving rapidly, especially during the
Covid-19 pandemic. The findings of this study have implications for all three
LCSD stakeholders: LCSD platform vendors, LCSD developers/practitioners,
Researchers, and Educators. Researchers and LCSD platform vendors can
collaborate to improve different aspects of LCSD, such as better tutorial-based
documentation, testing, and DevOps support.
