Title: Developing a Knowledge Graph Framework for Pharmacokinetic Natural Product-Drug Interactions
Authors: Sanya B. Taneja, Tiffany J. Callahan, Mary F. Paine, Sandra L. Kane-Gill, Halil Kilicoglu et al.
ID: 2209.11950
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.11950

Abstract:
Pharmacokinetic natural product-drug interactions (NPDIs) occur when botanical
natural products are co-consumed with pharmaceutical drugs. Understanding
mechanisms of NPDIs is key to preventing adverse events. We constructed a
knowledge graph framework, NP-KG, as a step toward computational discovery of
pharmacokinetic NPDIs. NP-KG is a heterogeneous KG with biomedical ontologies,
linked data, and full texts of the scientific literature, constructed with the
Phenotype Knowledge Translator framework and the semantic relation extraction
systems, SemRep and Integrated Network and Dynamic Reasoning Assembler. NP-KG
was evaluated with case studies of pharmacokinetic green tea- and kratom-drug
interactions through path searches and meta-path discovery to determine
congruent and contradictory information compared to ground truth data. The fully
integrated NP-KG consisted of 745,512 nodes and 7,249,576 edges. Evaluation of
NP-KG resulted in congruent (38.98% for green tea, 50% for kratom),
contradictory (15.25% for green tea, 21.43% for kratom), and both congruent and
contradictory (15.25% for green tea, 21.43% for kratom) information. Potential
pharmacokinetic mechanisms for several purported NPDIs, including the green
tea-raloxifene, green tea-nadolol, kratom-midazolam, kratom-quetiapine, and
kratom-venlafaxine interactions were congruent with the published literature.
NP-KG is the first KG to integrate biomedical ontologies with full texts of the
scientific literature focused on natural products. We demonstrate the
application of NP-KG to identify pharmacokinetic interactions involving enzymes,
transporters, and pharmaceutical drugs. We envision that NP-KG will facilitate
improved human-machine collaboration to guide researchers in future studies of
pharmacokinetic NPDIs. The NP-KG framework is publicly available at
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6814507 and https://github.com/sanyabt/np-kg.
