Title: A Decade of Code Comment Quality Assessment: A Systematic Literature Review
Authors: Pooja Rani, Arianna Blasi, Nataliia Stulova, Sebastiano Panichella, Alessandra Gorla et al.
ID: 2209.08165
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.08165

Abstract:
Code comments are important artifacts in software systems and play a paramount
role in many software engineering (SE) tasks related to maintenance and program
comprehension. However, while it is widely accepted that high quality matters in
code comments just as it matters in source code, assessing comment quality in
practice is still an open problem. First and foremost, there is no unique
definition of quality when it comes to evaluating code comments. The few
existing studies on this topic rather focus on specific attributes of quality
that can be easily quantified and measured. Existing techniques and
corresponding tools may also focus on comments bound to a specific programming
language, and may only deal with comments with specific scopes and clear goals
(e.g., Javadoc comments at the method level, or in-body comments describing
TODOs to be addressed). In this paper, we present a Systematic Literature Review
(SLR) of the last decade of research in SE to answer the following research
questions: (i) What types of comments do researchers focus on when assessing
comment quality? (ii) What quality attributes (QAs) do they consider? (iii)
Which tools and techniques do they use to assess comment quality?, and (iv) How
do they evaluate their studies on comment quality assessment in general? Our
evaluation, based on the analysis of 2353 papers and the actual review of 47
relevant ones, shows that (i) most studies and techniques focus on comments in
Java code, thus may not be generalizable to other languages, and (ii) the
analyzed studies focus on four main QAs of a total of 21 QAs identified in the
literature, with a clear predominance of checking consistency between comments
and the code. We observe that researchers rely on manual assessment and specific
heuristics rather than the automated assessment of the comment quality
attributes.
