Title: SQL and NoSQL Databases Software architectures performance analysis and assessments -- A Systematic Literature review
Authors: Wisal Khan, Teerath Kumar, Zhang Cheng, Kislay Raj, Arunabha M Roy et al.
ID: 2209.06977
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.06977

Abstract:
Context: The efficient processing of Big Data is a challenging task for SQL and
NoSQL Databases, where competent software architecture plays a vital role. The
SQL Databases are designed for structuring data and supporting vertical
scalability. In contrast, horizontal scalability is backed by NoSQL Databases
and can process sizeable unstructured Data efficiently. One can choose the right
paradigm according to the organisation's needs; however, making the correct
choice can often be challenging. The SQL and NoSQL Databases follow different
architectures. Also, the mixed model is followed by each category of NoSQL
Databases. Hence, data movement becomes difficult for cloud consumers across
multiple cloud service providers (CSPs). In addition, each cloud platform IaaS,
PaaS, SaaS, and DBaaS also monitors various paradigms. Objective: This
systematic literature review (SLR) aims to study the related articles associated
with SQL and NoSQL Database software architectures and tackle data portability
and Interoperability among various cloud platforms. State of the art presented
many performance comparison studies of SQL and NoSQL Databases by observing
scaling, performance, availability, consistency and sharding characteristics.
According to the research studies, NoSQL Database designed structures can be the
right choice for big data analytics, while SQL Databases are suitable for OLTP
Databases. The researcher proposes numerous approaches associated with data
movement in the cloud. Platform-based APIs are developed, which makes users'
data movement difficult. Therefore, data portability and Interoperability issues
are noticed during data movement across multiple CSPs. To minimize developer
efforts and Interoperability, Unified APIs are demanded to make data movement
relatively more accessible among various cloud platforms.
