Title: Improving the Performance of DNN-based Software Services using Automated Layer Caching
Authors: Mohammadamin Abedi, Yanni Iouannou, Pooyan Jamshidi, Hadi Hemmati
ID: 2209.08625
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.08625

Abstract:
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have become an essential component in many
application domains including web-based services. A variety of these services
require high throughput and (close to) real-time features, for instance, to
respond or react to users' requests or to process a stream of incoming data on
time. However, the trend in DNN design is toward larger models with many layers
and parameters to achieve more accurate results. Although these models are often
pre-trained, the computational complexity in such large models can still be
relatively significant, hindering low inference latency. Implementing a caching
mechanism is a typical systems engineering solution for speeding up a service
response time. However, traditional caching is often not suitable for DNN-based
services. In this paper, we propose an end-to-end automated solution to improve
the performance of DNN-based services in terms of their computational complexity
and inference latency. Our caching method adopts the ideas of self-distillation
of DNN models and early exits. The proposed solution is an automated online
layer caching mechanism that allows early exiting of a large model during
inference time if the cache model in one of the early exits is confident enough
for final prediction. One of the main contributions of this paper is that we
have implemented the idea as an online caching, meaning that the cache models do
not need access to training data and perform solely based on the incoming data
at run-time, making it suitable for applications using pre-trained models. Our
experiments results on two downstream tasks (face and object classification)
show that, on average, caching can reduce the computational complexity of those
services up to 58\% (in terms of FLOPs count) and improve their inference
latency up to 46\% with low to zero reduction in accuracy.
