Title: Data types as a more ergonomic frontend for Grammar-Guided Genetic Programming
Authors: Guilherme Espada, Leon Ingelse, Paulo Canelas, Pedro Barbosa, Alcides Fonseca
ID: 2210.04826
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.04826

Abstract:
Genetic Programming (GP) is an heuristic method that can be applied to many
Machine Learning, Optimization and Engineering problems. In particular, it has
been widely used in Software Engineering for Test-case generation, Program
Synthesis and Improvement of Software (GI). Grammar-Guided Genetic Programming
(GGGP) approaches allow the user to refine the domain of valid program
solutions. Backus Normal Form is the most popular interface for describing
Context-Free Grammars (CFG) for GGGP. BNF and its derivatives have the
disadvantage of interleaving the grammar language and the target language of the
program. We propose to embed the grammar as an internal Domain-Specific Language
in the host language of the framework. This approach has the same expressive
power as BNF and EBNF while using the host language type-system to take
advantage of all the existing tooling: linters, formatters, type-checkers,
autocomplete, and legacy code support. These tools have a practical utility in
designing software in general, and GP systems in particular. We also present
Meta-Handlers, user-defined overrides of the tree-generation system. This
technique extends our object-oriented encoding with more practicability and
expressive power than existing CFG approaches, achieving the same expressive
power of Attribute Grammars, but without the grammar vs target language duality.
Furthermore, we evidence that this approach is feasible, showing an example
Python implementation as proof. We also compare our approach against textual
BNF-representations w.r.t. expressive power and ergonomics. These advantages do
not come at the cost of performance, as shown by our empirical evaluation on 5
benchmarks of our example implementation against PonyGE2. We conclude that our
approach has better ergonomics with the same expressive power and performance of
textual BNF-based grammar encodings.
