Title: Do Software Security Practices Yield Fewer Vulnerabilities?
Authors: Nusrat Zahan, Shohanuzzaman Shohan, Dan Harris, Laurie Williams
ID: 2210.14884
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.14884

Abstract:
Due to the ever-increasing security breaches, practitioners are motivated to
produce more secure software. In the United States, the White House Office
released a memorandum on Executive Order (EO) 14028 that mandates organizations
provide self-attestation of the use of secure software development practices.
The OpenSSF Scorecard project allows practitioners to measure the use of
software security practices automatically. However, little research has been
done to determine whether the use of security practices improves package
security, particularly which security practices have the biggest impact on
security outcomes. The goal of this study is to assist practitioners and
researchers making informed decisions on which security practices to adopt
through the development of models between software security practice scores and
security vulnerability counts. To that end, we developed five supervised machine
learning models for npm and PyPI packages using the OpenSSF Scorecared security
practices scores and aggregate security scores as predictors and the number of
externally-reported vulnerabilities as a target variable. Our models found four
security practices (Maintained, Code Review, Branch Protection, and Security
Policy) were the most important practices influencing vulnerability count.
However, we had low R^2 (ranging from 9% to 12%) when we tested the models to
predict vulnerability counts. Additionally, we observed that the number of
reported vulnerabilities increased rather than reduced as the aggregate security
score of the packages increased. Both findings indicate that additional factors
may influence the package vulnerability count. We suggest that vulnerability
count and security score data be refined such that these measures may be used to
provide actionable guidance on security practices.
