Title: Automated Detection, Categorisation and Developers' Experience with the Violations of Honesty in Mobile Apps
Authors: Humphrey O. Obie, Hung Du, Kashumi Madampe, Mojtaba Shahin, Idowu Ilekura et al.
ID: 2211.07142
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.07142

Abstract:
Human values such as honesty, social responsibility, fairness, privacy, and the
like are things considered important by individuals and society. Software
systems, including mobile software applications (apps), may ignore or violate
such values, leading to negative effects in various ways for individuals and
society. While some works have investigated different aspects of human values in
software engineering, this mixed-methods study focuses on honesty as a critical
human value. In particular, we studied (i) how to detect honesty violations in
mobile apps, (ii) the types of honesty violations in mobile apps, and (iii) the
perspectives of app developers on these detected honesty violations. We first
develop and evaluate 7 machine learning (ML) models to automatically detect
violations of the value of honesty in app reviews from an end user perspective.
The most promising was a Deep Neural Network model with F1 score of 0.921. We
then conducted a manual analysis of 401 reviews containing honesty violations
and characterised honest violations in mobile apps into 10 categories: unfair
cancellation and refund policies; false advertisements; delusive subscriptions;
cheating systems; inaccurate information; unfair fees; no service; deletion of
reviews; impersonation; and fraudulent looking apps. A developer survey and
interview study with mobile developers then identified 7 key causes behind
honesty violations in mobile apps and 8 strategies to avoid or fix such
violations. The findings of our developer study also articulate the negative
consequences that honesty violations might bring for businesses, developers, and
users. Finally, the app developers' feedback shows that our prototype ML-based
models can have promising benefits in practice.
