Title: Towards Using Behavior Trees in Industrial Automation Controllers
Authors: Aleksandr Sidorenko, Mahdi Rezapour, Achim Wagner, Martin Ruskowski
ID: 2404.14030
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.14030

Abstract:
The Industry 4.0 paradigm manifests the shift towards mass customization and cyber-physical production systems (CPPS) and sets new requirements for industrial automation software in terms of modularity, flexibility, and short development cycles of control programs. Though programmable logical controllers (PLCs) have been evolving into versatile and powerful edge devices, there is a lack of PLC software flexibility and integration between low-level programs and high-level task-oriented control frameworks. Behavior trees (BTs) is a novel framework, which enables rapid design of modular hierarchical control structures. It combines improved modularity with a simple and intuitive design of control logic. This paper proposes an approach for improving the industrial control software design by integrating BTs into PLC programs and separating hardware related functionalities from the coordination logic. Several strategies for integration of BTs into PLCs are shown. The first two integrate BTs with the IEC 61131 based PLCs and are based on the use of the PLCopen Common Behavior Model. The last one utilized event-based BTs and shows the integration with the IEC 61499 based controllers. An application example demonstrates the approach.
  The paper contributes in the following ways. First, we propose a new PLC software design, which improves modularity, supports better separation of concerns, and enables rapid development and reconfiguration of the control software. Second, we show and evaluate the integration of the BT framework into both IEC 61131 and IEC 61499 based PLCs, as well as the integration of the PLCopen function blocks with the external BT library. This leads to better integration of the low-level PLC code and the AI-based task-oriented frameworks. It also improves the skill-based programming approach for PLCs by using BTs for skills composition.
