Title: RACCooN: A Versatile Instructional Video Editing Framework with Auto-Generated Narratives
Authors: Jaehong Yoon, Shoubin Yu, Mohit Bansal
ID: 2405.18406
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.18406

Abstract:
Recent video generative models primarily rely on carefully written text prompts for specific tasks, like inpainting or style editing. They require labor-intensive textual descriptions for input videos, hindering their flexibility to adapt personal/raw videos to user specifications. This paper proposes RACCooN, a versatile and user-friendly video-to-paragraph-to-video generative framework that supports multiple video editing capabilities such as removal, addition, and modification, through a unified pipeline. RACCooN consists of two principal stages: Video-to-Paragraph (V2P) and Paragraph-to-Video (P2V). In the V2P stage, we automatically describe video scenes in well-structured natural language, capturing both the holistic context and focused object details. Subsequently, in the P2V stage, users can optionally refine these descriptions to guide the video diffusion model, enabling various modifications to the input video, such as removing, changing subjects, and/or adding new objects. The proposed approach stands out from other methods through several significant contributions: (1) RACCooN suggests a multi-granular spatiotemporal pooling strategy to generate well-structured video descriptions, capturing both the broad context and object details without requiring complex human annotations, simplifying precise video content editing based on text for users. (2) Our video generative model incorporates auto-generated narratives or instructions to enhance the quality and accuracy of the generated content. (3) RACCooN also plans to imagine new objects in a given video, so users simply prompt the model to receive a detailed video editing plan for complex video editing. The proposed framework demonstrates impressive versatile capabilities in video-to-paragraph generation, video content editing, and can be incorporated into other SoTA video generative models for further enhancement.
