Title: MINT: a Multi-modal Image and Narrative Text Dubbing Dataset for Foley Audio Content Planning and Generation
Authors: Ruibo Fu, Shuchen Shi, Hongming Guo, Tao Wang, Chunyu Qiang, Zhengqi Wen, Jianhua Tao, Xin Qi, Yi Lu, Xiaopeng Wang, Zhiyong Wang, Yukun Liu, Xuefei Liu, Shuai Zhang, Guanjun Li
ID: 2406.10591
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.10591

Abstract:
Foley audio, critical for enhancing the immersive experience in multimedia content, faces significant challenges in the AI-generated content (AIGC) landscape. Despite advancements in AIGC technologies for text and image generation, the foley audio dubbing remains rudimentary due to difficulties in cross-modal scene matching and content correlation. Current text-to-audio technology, which relies on detailed and acoustically relevant textual descriptions, falls short in practical video dubbing applications. Existing datasets like AudioSet, AudioCaps, Clotho, Sound-of-Story, and WavCaps do not fully meet the requirements for real-world foley audio dubbing task. To address this, we introduce the Multi-modal Image and Narrative Text Dubbing Dataset (MINT), designed to enhance mainstream dubbing tasks such as literary story audiobooks dubbing, image/silent video dubbing. Besides, to address the limitations of existing TTA technology in understanding and planning complex prompts, a Foley Audio Content Planning, Generation, and Alignment (CPGA) framework is proposed, which includes a content planning module leveraging large language models for complex multi-modal prompts comprehension. Additionally, the training process is optimized using Proximal Policy Optimization based reinforcement learning, significantly improving the alignment and auditory realism of generated foley audio. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach significantly advances the field of foley audio dubbing, providing robust solutions for the challenges of multi-modal dubbing. Even when utilizing the relatively lightweight GPT-2 model, our framework outperforms open-source multimodal large models such as LLaVA, DeepSeek-VL, and Moondream2. The dataset is available at https://github.com/borisfrb/MINT .
