Title: Collaborative Experience between Scientific Software Projects using Agile Scrum Development
Authors: A. L. Baxter, S. Y. BenZvi, W. Bonivento, A. Brazier, M. Clark et al.
ID: 2101.07779
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.07779

Abstract:
Developing sustainable software for the scientific community requires expertise
in software engineering and domain science. This can be challenging due to the
unique needs of scientific software, the insufficient resources for software
engineering practices in the scientific community, and the complexity of
developing for evolving scientific contexts. While open-source software can
partially address these concerns, it can introduce complicating dependencies and
delay development. These issues can be reduced if scientists and software
developers collaborate. We present a case study wherein scientists from the
SuperNova Early Warning System collaborated with software developers from the
Scalable Cyberinfrastructure for Multi-Messenger Astrophysics project. The
collaboration addressed the difficulties of open-source software development,
but presented additional risks to each team. For the scientists, there was a
concern of relying on external systems and lacking control in the development
process. For the developers, there was a risk in supporting a user-group while
maintaining core development. These issues were mitigated by creating a second
Agile Scrum framework in parallel with the developers' ongoing Agile Scrum
process. This Agile collaboration promoted communication, ensured that the
scientists had an active role in development, and allowed the developers to
evaluate and implement the scientists' software requirements. The collaboration
provided benefits for each group: the scientists actuated their development by
using an existing platform, and the developers utilized the scientists' use-case
to improve their systems. This case study suggests that scientists and software
developers can avoid scientific computing issues by collaborating and that Agile
Scrum methods can address emergent concerns.
