Title: Microservice Maturity of Organizations: towards an assessment framework
Authors: Jean-Philippe Gouigoux, Dalila Tamzalit, Joost Noppen
ID: 2105.14935
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.14935

Abstract:
This early work aims to allow organizations to diagnose their capacity to
properly adopt microservices through initial milestones of a Microservice
Maturity Model (MiMMo). The objective is to prepare the way towards a general
framework to help companies and industries to determine their microservices
maturity. Organizations lean more and more on distributed web applications and
Line of Business software. This is particularly relevant during the current
Covid-19 crisis, where companies are even more challenged to offer their
services online, targeting a very high level of responsiveness in the face of
rapidly increasing and diverse demands. For this, microservices remain the most
suitable delivery application architectural style. They allow agility not only
on the technical application, as often considered, but on the enterprise
architecture as a whole, influencing the actual financial business of the
company. However, microservices adoption is highly risk-prone and complex.
Before they establish an appropriate migration plan, first and foremost,
companies must assess their degree of readiness to adopt microservices. For
this, MiMMo, a Microservices Maturity Model framework assessment, is proposed to
help companies assess their readiness for the microservice architectural style,
based on their actual situation. MiMMo results from observations of and
experience with about thirty organizations writing software. It conceptualizes
and generalizes the progression paths they have followed to adopt microservices
appropriately. Using the model, an organization can evaluate itself in two
dimensions and five maturity levels and thus: (i) benchmark itself on its
current use of microservices; (ii) project the next steps it needs to achieve a
higher maturity level and (iii) analyze how it has evolved and maintain a global
coherence between technical and business stakes.
