Title: Automatic Recall of Software Lessons Learned for Software Project Managers
Authors: Tamer Mohamed Abdellatif, Luiz Fernando Capretz, Danny Ho
ID: 2110.05261
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.05261

Abstract:
Lessons learned (LL) records constitute the software organization memory of
successes and failures. LL are recorded within the organization repository for
future reference to optimize planning, gain experience, and elevate market
competitiveness. However, manually searching this repository is a daunting task,
so it is often disregarded. This can lead to the repetition of previous mistakes
or even missing potential opportunities. This, in turn, can negatively affect
the profitability and competitiveness of organizations. We aim to present a
novel solution that provides an automatic process to recall relevant LL and to
push those LL to project managers. This will dramatically save the time and
effort of manually searching the unstructured LL repositories and thus encourage
the LL exploitation. We exploit existing project artifacts to build the LL
search queries on-the-fly in order to bypass the tedious manual searching. An
empirical case study is conducted to build the automatic LL recall solution and
evaluate its effectiveness. The study employs three of the most popular
information retrieval models to construct the solution. Furthermore, a
real-world dataset of 212 LL records from 30 different software projects is used
for validation. Top-k and MAP well-known accuracy metrics are used as well. Our
case study results confirm the effectiveness of the automatic LL recall
solution. Also, the results prove the success of using existing project
artifacts to dynamically build the search query string. This is supported by a
discerning accuracy of about 70% achieved in the case of top-k. The automatic LL
recall solution is valid with high accuracy. It will eliminate the effort needed
to manually search the LL repository. Therefore, this will positively encourage
project managers to reuse the available LL knowledge, which will avoid old
pitfalls and unleash hidden business opportunities.
