Title: A Methodology for Developing a Verifiable Aircraft Engine Controller from Formal Requirements
Authors: Matt Luckcuck, Marie Farrell, Oisín Sheridan, Rosemary Monahan
ID: 2110.09277
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.09277

Abstract:
Verification of complex, safety-critical systems is a significant challenge.
Manual testing and simulations are often used, but are only capable of exploring
a subset of the system's reachable states. Formal methods are
mathematically-based techniques for the specification and development of
software, which can provide proofs of properties and exhaustive checks over a
system's state space. In this paper, we present a formal requirements-driven
methodology, applied to a model of an aircraft engine controller that has been
provided by our industrial partner. Our methodology begins by formalising the
controller's natural-language requirements using the (pre-existing) Formal
Requirements Elicitation Tool (FRET), iteratively, in consultation with our
industry partner. Once formalised, FRET can automatically translate the
requirements to enable their verification alongside a Simulink model of the
aircraft engine controller; the requirements can also guide formal verification
using other approaches. These two parallel streams in our methodology seek to
combine the results from formal requirements elicitation, classical verification
approaches, and runtime verification; to support the verification of aerospace
systems modelled in Simulink, from the requirements phase through to execution.
Our methodology harnesses the power of formal methods in a way that complements
existing verification techniques, and supports the traceability of requirements
throughout the verification process. This methodology streamlines the process of
developing verifiable aircraft engine controllers, by ensuring that the
requirements are formalised up-front and useable during development. In this
paper we give an overview of (FRET), describe our methodology and work to-date
on the formalisation and verification of the requirements, and outline future
work using our methodology.
