Title: Video Coding for Machine: Compact Visual Representation Compression for Intelligent Collaborative Analytics
Authors: Wenhan Yang, Haofeng Huang, Yueyu Hu, Ling-Yu Duan, Jiaying Liu
ID: 2110.09241
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.09241

Abstract:
Video Coding for Machines (VCM) is committed to bridging to an extent separate
research tracks of video/image compression and feature compression, and attempts
to optimize compactness and efficiency jointly from a unified perspective of
high accuracy machine vision and full fidelity human vision. In this paper, we
summarize VCM methodology and philosophy based on existing academia and
industrial efforts. The development of VCM follows a general rate-distortion
optimization, and the categorization of key modules or techniques is
established. From previous works, it is demonstrated that, although existing
works attempt to reveal the nature of scalable representation in bits when
dealing with machine and human vision tasks, there remains a rare study in the
generality of low bit rate representation, and accordingly how to support a
variety of visual analytic tasks. Therefore, we investigate a novel visual
information compression for the analytics taxonomy problem to strengthen the
capability of compact visual representations extracted from multiple tasks for
visual analytics. A new perspective of task relationships versus compression is
revisited. By keeping in mind the transferability among different machine vision
tasks (e.g. high-level semantic and mid-level geometry-related), we aim to
support multiple tasks jointly at low bit rates. In particular, to narrow the
dimensionality gap between neural network generated features extracted from
pixels and a variety of machine vision features/labels (e.g. scene class,
segmentation labels), a codebook hyperprior is designed to compress the neural
network-generated features. As demonstrated in our experiments, this new
hyperprior model is expected to improve feature compression efficiency by
estimating the signal entropy more accurately, which enables further
investigation of the granularity of abstracting compact features among different
tasks.
