Title: Action-Free Reasoning for Policy Generalization
Authors: Jaden Clark, Suvir Mirchandani, Dorsa Sadigh, Suneel Belkhale
ID: 2502.03729
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.03729

Abstract:
End-to-end imitation learning offers a promising approach for training robot
policies. However, generalizing to new settings remains a significant challenge.
Although large-scale robot demonstration datasets have shown potential for
inducing generalization, they are resource-intensive to scale. In contrast,
human video data is abundant and diverse, presenting an attractive alternative.
Yet, these human-video datasets lack action labels, complicating their use in
imitation learning. Existing methods attempt to extract grounded action
representations (e.g., hand poses), but resulting policies struggle to bridge
the embodiment gap between human and robot actions. We propose an alternative
approach: leveraging language-based reasoning from human videos-essential for
guiding robot actions-to train generalizable robot policies. Building on recent
advances in reasoning-based policy architectures, we introduce Reasoning through
Action-free Data (RAD). RAD learns from both robot demonstration data (with
reasoning and action labels) and action-free human video data (with only
reasoning labels). The robot data teaches the model to map reasoning to
low-level actions, while the action-free data enhances reasoning capabilities.
Additionally, we will release a new dataset of 3,377 human-hand demonstrations
with reasoning annotations compatible with the Bridge V2 benchmark and aimed at
facilitating future research on reasoning-driven robot learning. Our experiments
show that RAD enables effective transfer across the embodiment gap, allowing
robots to perform tasks seen only in action-free data. Furthermore, scaling up
action-free reasoning data significantly improves policy performance and
generalization to novel tasks. These results highlight the promise of
reasoning-driven learning from action-free datasets for advancing generalizable
robot control. Project page: https://rad-generalization.github.io
