Title: Evaluating Intelligence via Trial and Error
Authors: Jingtao Zhan, Jiahao Zhao, Jiayu Li, Yiqun Liu, Bo Zhang et al. (+5)
ID: 2502.18858
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.18858

Intelligence is a crucial trait for species to find solutions within a limited
number of trial-and-error attempts. Building on this idea, we introduce Survival
Game as a framework to evaluate intelligence based on the number of failed
attempts in a trial-and-error process. Fewer failures indicate higher
intelligence. When the expectation and variance of failure counts are both
finite, it signals the ability to consistently find solutions to new challenges,
which we define as the Autonomous Level of intelligence. Using Survival Game, we
comprehensively evaluate existing AI systems. Our results show that while AI
systems achieve the Autonomous Level in simple tasks, they are still far from it
in more complex tasks, such as vision, search, recommendation, and language.
While scaling current AI technologies might help, this would come at an
astronomical cost. Projections suggest that achieving the Autonomous Level for
general tasks would require $10^{26}$ parameters. To put this into perspective,
loading such a massive model requires so many H100 GPUs that their total value
is $10^{7}$ times that of Apple Inc.'s market value. Even with Moore's Law,
supporting such a parameter scale would take $70$ years. This staggering cost
highlights the complexity of human tasks and the inadequacies of current AI
technologies. To further investigate this phenomenon, we conduct a theoretical
analysis of Survival Game and its experimental results. Our findings suggest
that human tasks possess a criticality property. As a result, Autonomous Level
requires a deep understanding of the task's underlying mechanisms. Current AI
systems, however, do not fully grasp these mechanisms and instead rely on
superficial mimicry, making it difficult for them to reach an autonomous level.
We believe Survival Game can not only guide the future development of AI but
also offer profound insights into human intelligence.
