Title: SurgRAW: Multi-Agent Workflow with Chain of Thought Reasoning for Robotic Surgical Video Analysis
Authors: Chang Han Low, Ziyue Wang, Tianyi Zhang, Zhu Zhuo, Zhitao Zeng et al.
ID: 2503.10265
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.10265

Abstract:
Robotic-assisted surgery (RAS) is central to modern surgery, driving the need
for intelligent systems with accurate scene understanding. Most existing
surgical AI methods rely on isolated, task-specific models, leading to
fragmented pipelines with limited interpretability and no unified understanding
of RAS scene. Vision-Language Models (VLMs) offer strong zero-shot reasoning,
but struggle with hallucinations, domain gaps and weak task-interdependency
modeling. To address the lack of unified data for RAS scene understanding, we
introduce SurgCoTBench, the first reasoning-focused benchmark in RAS, covering
14256 QA pairs with frame-level annotations across five major surgical tasks.
Building on SurgCoTBench, we propose SurgRAW, a clinically aligned
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) driven agentic workflow for zero-shot multi-task
reasoning in surgery. SurgRAW employs a hierarchical reasoning workflow where an
orchestrator divides surgical scene understanding into two reasoning streams and
directs specialized agents to generate task-level reasoning, while higher-level
agents capture workflow interdependencies or ground output clinically.
Specifically, we propose a panel discussion mechanism to ensure task-specific
agents collaborate synergistically and leverage on task interdependencies.
Similarly, we incorporate a retrieval-augmented generation module to enrich
agents with surgical knowledge and alleviate domain gaps in general VLMs. We
design task-specific CoT prompts grounded in surgical domain to ensure
clinically aligned reasoning, reduce hallucinations and enhance
interpretability. Extensive experiments show that SurgRAW surpasses mainstream
VLMs and agentic systems and outperforms a supervised model by 14.61% accuracy.
Dataset and code is available at https://github.com/jinlab-imvr/SurgRAW.git .
