Title: A2Perf: Real-World Autonomous Agents Benchmark
Authors: Ikechukwu Uchendu, Jason Jabbour, Korneel Van den Berghe, Joel Runevic, Matthew Stewart et al. (+13)
ID: 2503.03056
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.03056

Autonomous agents and systems cover a number of application areas, from robotics
and digital assistants to combinatorial optimization, all sharing common,
unresolved research challenges. It is not sufficient for agents to merely solve
a given task; they must generalize to out-of-distribution tasks, perform
reliably, and use hardware resources efficiently during training and inference,
among other requirements. Several methods, such as reinforcement learning and
imitation learning, are commonly used to tackle these problems, each with
different trade-offs. However, there is a lack of benchmarking suites that
define the environments, datasets, and metrics which can be used to provide a
meaningful way for the community to compare progress on applying these methods
to real-world problems. We introduce A2Perf--a benchmark with three environments
that closely resemble real-world domains: computer chip floorplanning, web
navigation, and quadruped locomotion. A2Perf provides metrics that track task
performance, generalization, system resource efficiency, and reliability, which
are all critical to real-world applications. Using A2Perf, we demonstrate that
web navigation agents can achieve latencies comparable to human reaction times
on consumer hardware, reveal reliability trade-offs between algorithms for
quadruped locomotion, and quantify the energy costs of different learning
approaches for computer chip-design. In addition, we propose a data cost metric
to account for the cost incurred acquiring offline data for imitation learning
and hybrid algorithms, which allows us to better compare these approaches.
A2Perf also contains several standard baselines, enabling apples-to-apples
comparisons across methods and facilitating progress in real-world autonomy. As
an open-source benchmark, A2Perf is designed to remain accessible, up-to-date,
and useful to the research community over the long term.
