Title: LLM+MAP: Bimanual Robot Task Planning using Large Language Models and Planning Domain Definition Language
Authors: Kun Chu, Xufeng Zhao, Cornelius Weber, Stefan Wermter
ID: 2503.17309
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.17309

Abstract:
Bimanual robotic manipulation provides significant versatility, but also
presents an inherent challenge due to the complexity involved in the spatial and
temporal coordination between two hands. Existing works predominantly focus on
attaining human-level manipulation skills for robotic hands, yet little
attention has been paid to task planning on long-horizon timescales. With their
outstanding in-context learning and zero-shot generation abilities, Large
Language Models (LLMs) have been applied and grounded in diverse robotic
embodiments to facilitate task planning. However, LLMs still suffer from errors
in long-horizon reasoning and from hallucinations in complex robotic tasks,
lacking a guarantee of logical correctness when generating the plan. Previous
works, such as LLM+P, extended LLMs with symbolic planners. However, none have
been successfully applied to bimanual robots. New challenges inevitably arise in
bimanual manipulation, necessitating not only effective task decomposition but
also efficient task allocation. To address these challenges, this paper
introduces LLM+MAP, a bimanual planning framework that integrates LLM reasoning
and multi-agent planning, automating effective and efficient bimanual task
planning. We conduct simulated experiments on various long-horizon manipulation
tasks of differing complexity. Our method is built using GPT-4o as the backend,
and we compare its performance against plans generated directly by LLMs,
including GPT-4o, V3 and also recent strong reasoning models o1 and R1. By
analyzing metrics such as planning time, success rate, group debits, and
planning-step reduction rate, we demonstrate the superior performance of
LLM+MAP, while also providing insights into robotic reasoning. Code is available
at https://github.com/Kchu/LLM-MAP.
