Title: TxGemma: Efficient and Agentic LLMs for Therapeutics
Authors: Eric Wang, Samuel Schmidgall, Paul F. Jaeger, Fan Zhang, Rory Pilgrim et al.
ID: 2504.06196
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.06196

Abstract:
Therapeutic development is a costly and high-risk endeavor that is often plagued
by high failure rates. To address this, we introduce TxGemma, a suite of
efficient, generalist large language models (LLMs) capable of therapeutic
property prediction as well as interactive reasoning and explainability. Unlike
task-specific models, TxGemma synthesizes information from diverse sources,
enabling broad application across the therapeutic development pipeline. The
suite includes 2B, 9B, and 27B parameter models, fine-tuned from Gemma-2 on a
comprehensive dataset of small molecules, proteins, nucleic acids, diseases, and
cell lines. Across 66 therapeutic development tasks, TxGemma achieved superior
or comparable performance to the state-of-the-art generalist model on 64
(superior on 45), and against state-of-the-art specialist models on 50 (superior
on 26). Fine-tuning TxGemma models on therapeutic downstream tasks, such as
clinical trial adverse event prediction, requires less training data than
fine-tuning base LLMs, making TxGemma suitable for data-limited applications.
Beyond these predictive capabilities, TxGemma features conversational models
that bridge the gap between general LLMs and specialized property predictors.
These allow scientists to interact in natural language, provide mechanistic
reasoning for predictions based on molecular structure, and engage in scientific
discussions. Building on this, we further introduce Agentic-Tx, a generalist
therapeutic agentic system powered by Gemini 2.5 that reasons, acts, manages
diverse workflows, and acquires external domain knowledge. Agentic-Tx surpasses
prior leading models on the Humanity's Last Exam benchmark (Chemistry & Biology)
with 52.3% relative improvement over o3-mini (high) and 26.7% over o3-mini
(high) on GPQA (Chemistry) and excels with improvements of 6.3%
(ChemBench-Preference) and 2.4% (ChemBench-Mini) over o3-mini (high).
