Title: A Neurosymbolic Agent System for Compositional Visual Reasoning
Authors: Yichang Xu, Gaowen Liu, Ramana Rao Kompella, Sihao Hu, Fatih Ilhan et al.
ID: 2506.07778
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.07778

Abstract:
The advancement in large language models (LLMs) and large vision models has
fueled the rapid progress in multi-modal vision-language reasoning capabilities.
However, existing vision-language models (VLMs) remain challenged by
compositional visual reasoning. This paper presents VLAgent, a neuro-symbolic
approach to developing a Vision-Language Agent system for efficient
compositional visual reasoning with three novel features. First, VLAgent
develops an interpretable visualization-enhanced two-stage neuro-symbolic
reasoning system. The first stage is managed by a front-end engine that
generates a structured visual reasoning plan (symbolic program script) for each
compositional visual reasoning task by utilizing a pre-trained LLM powered with
few-shot chain-of-thought in-context learning. The second stage is managed by a
high-performance back-end engine. It transforms the planning script into
executable code based on visual input (image or video) and the combination of
neural models and symbolic functions and then performs a sequence of actions for
the compositional visual reason task. Second, to ensure and enhance the quality
of mapping the logic plan to a sequence of executable instructions, VLAgent
introduces the SS-parser, which examines the syntax and semantic correctness of
the planning script, detects and repairs the logic errors found in the
LLM-generated logic plan before generating the executable program. Third,
VLAgent introduces the execution verifier in critical reasoning steps to
validate and refine its compositional reasoning results in a stepwise manner,
for example, ensemble methods for critical visual reasoning and caption analysis
for low-confidence compositional reasoning. Extensive experiments on six visual
benchmarks compared to a dozen SoTA visual reasoning models show that VLAgent
outperforms existing representative approaches to compositional visual
reasoning.
