Title: Temperature and Persona Shape LLM Agent Consensus With Minimal Accuracy Gains in Qualitative Coding
Authors: Conrad Borchers, Bahar Shahrokhian, Francesco Balzan, Elham Tajik, Sreecharan Sankaranarayanan et al. (+1)
ID: 2507.11198
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.11198

Large Language Models (LLMs) enable new possibilities for qualitative research
at scale, including coding and data annotation. While multi-agent systems (MAS)
can emulate human coding workflows, their benefits over single-agent coding
remain poorly understood. We conducted an experimental study of how agent
persona and temperature shape consensus-building and coding accuracy of dialog
segments based on a codebook with 8 codes. Our open-source MAS mirrors deductive
human coding through structured agent discussion and consensus arbitration.
Using six open-source LLMs (with 3 to 32 billion parameters) and 18 experimental
configurations, we analyze over 77,000 coding decisions against a gold-standard
dataset of human-annotated transcripts from online math tutoring sessions.
Temperature significantly impacted whether and when consensus was reached across
all six LLMs. MAS with multiple personas (including neutral, assertive, or
empathetic), significantly delayed consensus in four out of six LLMs compared to
uniform personas. In three of those LLMs, higher temperatures significantly
diminished the effects of multiple personas on consensus. However, neither
temperature nor persona pairing lead to robust improvements in coding accuracy.
Single agents matched or outperformed MAS consensus in most conditions. Only one
model (OpenHermesV2:7B) and code category showed above-chance gains from MAS
deliberation when temperature was 0.5 or lower and especially when the agents
included at least one assertive persona. Qualitative analysis of MAS
collaboration for these configurations suggests that MAS may nonetheless aid in
narrowing ambiguous code applications that could improve codebooks and human-AI
coding. We contribute new insight into the limits of LLM-based qualitative
methods, challenging the notion that diverse MAS personas lead to better
outcomes. We open-source our MAS and experimentation code.
