Title: Do Role-Playing Agents Practice What They Preach? Belief-Behavior Consistency in LLM-Based Simulations of Human Trust
Authors: Amogh Mannekote, Adam Davies, Guohao Li, Kristy Elizabeth Boyer, ChengXiang Zhai et al. (+2)
ID: 2507.02197
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.02197

As LLMs are increasingly studied as role-playing agents to generate synthetic
data for human behavioral research, ensuring that their outputs remain coherent
with their assigned roles has become a critical concern. In this paper, we
investigate how consistently LLM-based role-playing agents' stated beliefs about
the behavior of the people they are asked to role-play ("what they say")
correspond to their actual behavior during role-play ("how they act").
Specifically, we establish an evaluation framework to rigorously measure how
well beliefs obtained by prompting the model can predict simulation outcomes in
advance. Using an augmented version of the GenAgents persona bank and the Trust
Game (a standard economic game used to quantify players' trust and reciprocity),
we introduce a belief-behavior consistency metric to systematically investigate
how it is affected by factors such as: (1) the types of beliefs we elicit from
LLMs, like expected outcomes of simulations versus task-relevant attributes of
individual characters LLMs are asked to simulate; (2) when and how we present
LLMs with relevant information about Trust Game; and (3) how far into the future
we ask the model to forecast its actions. We also explore how feasible it is to
impose a researcher's own theoretical priors in the event that the originally
elicited beliefs are misaligned with research objectives. Our results reveal
systematic inconsistencies between LLMs' stated (or imposed) beliefs and the
outcomes of their role-playing simulation, at both an individual- and
population-level. Specifically, we find that, even when models appear to encode
plausible beliefs, they may fail to apply them in a consistent way. These
findings highlight the need to identify how and when LLMs' stated beliefs align
with their simulated behavior, allowing researchers to use LLM-based agents
appropriately in behavioral studies.
