Title: UItron: Foundational GUI Agent with Advanced Perception and Planning
Authors: Zhixiong Zeng, Jing Huang, Liming Zheng, Wenkang Han, Yufeng Zhong et al. (+5)
ID: 2508.21767
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.21767

GUI agent aims to enable automated operations on Mobile/PC devices, which is an
important task toward achieving artificial general intelligence. The rapid
advancement of VLMs accelerates the development of GUI agents, owing to their
powerful capabilities in visual understanding and task planning. However,
building a GUI agent remains a challenging task due to the scarcity of operation
trajectories, the availability of interactive infrastructure, and the limitation
of initial capabilities in foundation models. In this work, we introduce UItron,
an open-source foundational model for automatic GUI agents, featuring advanced
GUI perception, grounding, and planning capabilities. UItron highlights the
necessity of systemic data engineering and interactive infrastructure as
foundational components for advancing GUI agent development. It not only
systematically studies a series of data engineering strategies to enhance
training effects, but also establishes an interactive environment connecting
both Mobile and PC devices. In training, UItron adopts supervised finetuning
over perception and planning tasks in various GUI scenarios, and then develop a
curriculum reinforcement learning framework to enable complex reasoning and
exploration for online environments. As a result, UItron achieves superior
performance in benchmarks of GUI perception, grounding, and planning. In
particular, UItron highlights the interaction proficiency with top-tier Chinese
mobile APPs, as we identified a general lack of Chinese capabilities even in
state-of-the-art solutions. To this end, we manually collect over one million
steps of operation trajectories across the top 100 most popular apps, and build
the offline and online agent evaluation environments. Experimental results
demonstrate that UItron achieves significant progress in Chinese app scenarios,
propelling GUI agents one step closer to real-world application.
