Title: Sentinel Agents for Secure and Trustworthy Agentic AI in Multi-Agent Systems
Authors: Diego Gosmar, Deborah A. Dahl
ID: 2509.14956
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.14956

Abstract:
This paper proposes a novel architectural framework aimed at enhancing security
and reliability in multi-agent systems (MAS). A central component of this
framework is a network of Sentinel Agents, functioning as a distributed security
layer that integrates techniques such as semantic analysis via large language
models (LLMs), behavioral analytics, retrieval-augmented verification, and
cross-agent anomaly detection. Such agents can potentially oversee inter-agent
communications, identify potential threats, enforce privacy and access controls,
and maintain comprehensive audit records. Complementary to the idea of Sentinel
Agents is the use of a Coordinator Agent. The Coordinator Agent supervises
policy implementation, and manages agent participation. In addition, the
Coordinator also ingests alerts from Sentinel Agents. Based on these alerts, it
can adapt policies, isolate or quarantine misbehaving agents, and contain
threats to maintain the integrity of the MAS ecosystem. This dual-layered
security approach, combining the continuous monitoring of Sentinel Agents with
the governance functions of Coordinator Agents, supports dynamic and adaptive
defense mechanisms against a range of threats, including prompt injection,
collusive agent behavior, hallucinations generated by LLMs, privacy breaches,
and coordinated multi-agent attacks. In addition to the architectural design, we
present a simulation study where 162 synthetic attacks of different families
(prompt injection, hallucination, and data exfiltration) were injected into a
multi-agent conversational environment. The Sentinel Agents successfully
detected the attack attempts, confirming the practical feasibility of the
proposed monitoring approach. The framework also offers enhanced system
observability, supports regulatory compliance, and enables policy evolution over
time.
