Title: Orchestrate, Generate, Reflect: A VLM-Based Multi-Agent Collaboration Framework for Automated Driving Policy Learning
Authors: Zengqi Peng, Yusen Xie, Yubin Wang, Rui Yang, Qifeng Chen et al.
ID: 2509.17042
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.17042

Abstract:
The advancement of foundation models fosters new initiatives for policy learning
in achieving safe and efficient autonomous driving. However, a critical
bottleneck lies in the manual engineering of reward functions and training
curricula for complex and dynamic driving tasks, which is a labor-intensive and
time-consuming process. To address this problem, we propose OGR (Orchestrate,
Generate, Reflect), a novel automated driving policy learning framework that
leverages vision-language model (VLM)-based multi-agent collaboration. Our
framework capitalizes on advanced reasoning and multimodal understanding
capabilities of VLMs to construct a hierarchical agent system. Specifically, a
centralized orchestrator plans high-level training objectives, while a
generation module employs a two-step analyze-then-generate process for efficient
generation of reward-curriculum pairs. A reflection module then facilitates
iterative optimization based on the online evaluation. Furthermore, a dedicated
memory module endows the VLM agents with the capabilities of long-term memory.
To enhance robustness and diversity of the generation process, we introduce a
parallel generation scheme and a human-in-the-loop technique for augmentation of
the reward observation space. Through efficient multi-agent cooperation and
leveraging rich multimodal information, OGR enables the online evolution of
reinforcement learning policies to acquire interaction-aware driving skills.
Extensive experiments in the CARLA simulator demonstrate the superior
performance, robust generalizability across distinct urban scenarios, and strong
compatibility with various RL algorithms. Further real-world experiments
highlight the practical viability and effectiveness of our framework. The source
code will be available upon acceptance of the paper.
