Title: How to Evaluate Medical AI
Authors: Ilia Kopanichuk, Petr Anokhin, Vladimir Shaposhnikov, Vladimir Makharev, Ekaterina Tsapieva et al. (+3)
ID: 2509.11941
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.11941

The integration of artificial intelligence (AI) into medical diagnostic
workflows requires robust and consistent evaluation methods to ensure
reliability, clinical relevance, and the inherent variability in expert
judgments. Traditional metrics like precision and recall often fail to account
for the inherent variability in expert judgments, leading to inconsistent
assessments of AI performance. Inter-rater agreement statistics like Cohen's
Kappa are more reliable but they lack interpretability. We introduce Relative
Precision and Recall of Algorithmic Diagnostics (RPAD and RRAD) - a new
evaluation metrics that compare AI outputs against multiple expert opinions
rather than a single reference. By normalizing performance against inter-expert
disagreement, these metrics provide a more stable and realistic measure of the
quality of predicted diagnosis. In addition to the comprehensive analysis of
diagnostic quality measures, our study contains a very important side result.
Our evaluation methodology allows us to avoid selecting diagnoses from a limited
list when evaluating a given case. Instead, both the models being tested and the
examiners verifying them arrive at a free-form diagnosis. In this automated
methodology for establishing the identity of free-form clinical diagnoses, a
remarkable 98% accuracy becomes attainable. We evaluate our approach using 360
medical dialogues, comparing multiple large language models (LLMs) against a
panel of physicians. Large-scale study shows that top-performing models, such as
DeepSeek-V3, achieve consistency on par with or exceeding expert consensus.
Moreover, we demonstrate that expert judgments exhibit significant variability -
often greater than that between AI and humans. This finding underscores the
limitations of any absolute metrics and supports the need to adopt relative
metrics in medical AI.
