Title: The Emergence of Altruism in Large-Language-Model Agents Society
Authors: Haoyang Li, Xiao Jia, Zhanzhan Zhao
ID: 2509.22537
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.22537

Leveraging Large Language Models (LLMs) for social simulation is a frontier in
computational social science. Understanding the social logics these agents
embody is critical to this attempt. However, existing research has primarily
focused on cooperation in small-scale, task-oriented games, overlooking how
altruism, which means sacrificing self-interest for collective benefit, emerges
in large-scale agent societies. To address this gap, we introduce a Schelling-
variant urban migration model that creates a social dilemma, compelling over 200
LLM agents to navigate an explicit conflict between egoistic (personal utility)
and altruistic (system utility) goals. Our central finding is a fundamental
difference in the social tendencies of LLMs. We identify two distinct
archetypes: "Adaptive Egoists", which default to prioritizing self-interest but
whose altruistic behaviors significantly increase under the influence of a
social norm-setting message board; and "Altruistic Optimizers", which exhibit an
inherent altruistic logic, consistently prioritizing collective benefit even at
a direct cost to themselves. Furthermore, to qualitatively analyze the cognitive
underpinnings of these decisions, we introduce a method inspired by Grounded
Theory to systematically code agent reasoning. In summary, this research
provides the first evidence of intrinsic heterogeneity in the egoistic and
altruistic tendencies of different LLMs. We propose that for social simulation,
model selection is not merely a matter of choosing reasoning capability, but of
choosing an intrinsic social action logic. While "Adaptive Egoists" may offer a
more suitable choice for simulating complex human societies, "Altruistic
Optimizers" are better suited for modeling idealized pro-social actors or
scenarios where collective welfare is the primary consideration.
