Title: GUI-PRA: Process Reward Agent for GUI Tasks
Authors: Tao Xiong, Xavier Hu, Yurun Chen, Yuhang Liu, Changqiao Wu et al. (+4)
ID: 2509.23263
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.23263

Graphical User Interface (GUI) Agents powered by Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs) show significant potential for automating tasks. However, they
often struggle with long-horizon tasks, leading to frequent failures. Process
Reward Models (PRMs) are a promising solution, as they can guide these agents
with crucial process signals during inference. Nevertheless, their application
to the GUI domain presents unique challenges. When processing dense artificial
inputs with long history data, PRMs suffer from a "lost in the middle"
phenomenon, where the overwhelming historical context compromises the evaluation
of the current step. Furthermore, standard PRMs lacks GUI changing awareness,
providing static evaluations that are disconnected from the dynamic consequences
of actions, a critical mismatch with the inherently dynamic nature of GUI tasks.
In response to these challenges, we introduce GUI-PRA (Process Reward Agent for
GUI Tasks), a judge agent designed to better provide process reward than
standard PRM by intelligently processing historical context and actively
perceiving UI state changes. Specifically, to directly combat the ``lost in the
middle'' phenomenon, we introduce a dynamic memory mechanism consisting of two
core components: a Relevance-based Retrieval Module to actively fetch pertinent
information from long histories and a Progressive Summarization Module to
dynamically condense growing interaction data, ensuring the model focuses on
relevant context. Moreover, to address the lack of UI changing awareness, we
introduce an Aadaptive UI Perception mechanism. This mechanism enables the agent
to reason about UI state changes and dynamically select the most appropriate
tool to gather grounded visual evidence, ensuring its evaluation is always
informed by the current UI context.
