Title: VAPU: System for Autonomous Legacy Code Modernization
Authors: Valtteri Ala-Salmi, Zeeshan Rasheed, Abdul Malik Sami, Muhammad Waseem, Kai-Kristian Kemell et al. (+3)
ID: 2510.18509
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.18509

In this study, we present a solution for the modernization of legacy
applications, an area of code generation where LLM-based multi-agent systems are
proving essential for complex multi-phased tasks. Legacy applications often
contain deprecated components that create compatibility, security, and
reliability risks, but high resource costs make companies hesitate to update. We
take a step forward to integrate an LLM-based multi-agent system as part of a
legacy web application update to provide a cost-effective solution to update
legacy applications autonomously. We propose a multi-agent system named a
Verifying Agent Pipeline Updater (VAPU), which is designed to update code files
in phases while simulating different roles in a software development team. In
our previous study, we evaluated the system for legacy version updates by using
six legacy web application view files by resulting errors and accomplished
requirements. This study extends the previous evaluation of a multi-agent
pipeline system by extending the evaluation of VAPU from a single LLM to five
LLMs and using the temperature parameter in both 0 to 1 settings. Additionally,
we tested the system with 20 open-source Python GitHub projects. The results of
the evaluation were compared to Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) and One-Shot Learning
(OSL) prompts. The extended evaluation of VAPU showed that particularly in a
low-temperature VAPU can get similar level of error count compared to the
ZSL/OSL prompts but with a higher level of fulfilled requirements, depending on
the LLM. VAPU showed up to 22.5% increase in the succeeding Python file update
requirements compared to ZSL/OSL prompts. The study indicates that an LLM-based
multi-agent system is a capable solution to update components of a legacy
application autonomously.
