Title: CRAwDAD: Causal Reasoning Augmentation with Dual-Agent Debate
Authors: Finn G. Vamosi, Nils D. Forkert
ID: 2511.22854
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.22854

Abstract:
When people reason about cause and effect, they often consider many competing
"what if" scenarios before deciding which explanation fits best. Analogously,
advanced language models capable of causal inference can consider multiple
interventions and counterfactuals to judge the validity of causal claims.
Crucially, this type of reasoning is less like a single calculation and more
like an internal dialogue between alternative hypotheses. In this paper, we make
this dialogue explicit through a dual-agent debate framework where one model
provides a structured causal inference, and the other critically examines this
reasoning for logical flaws. When disagreements arise, the agents attempt to
persuade each other, challenging each other's logic and revising their
conclusions until they converge on a mutually agreed answer. To take advantage
of this deliberative process, we specifically use reasoning language models,
whose strengths in both causal inference and adversarial debate remain
under-explored relative to standard large language models. We evaluate our
approach on the CLadder dataset, a benchmark linking natural language questions
to formally defined causal graphs across all three rungs of Pearl's ladder of
causation. With Qwen3 and DeepSeek-R1 as debater agents, we demonstrate that
multi-agent debate improves DeepSeek-R1's overall accuracy in causal inference
from 78.03% to 87.45%, with the counterfactual category specifically improving
from 67.94% to 80.04% accuracy. Similarly, Qwen3's overall accuracy improves
from 84.16% to 89.41%, and counterfactual questions from 71.53% to 80.35%,
showing that even strong models can still benefit greatly from debate with
weaker agents. Our results highlight the potential of reasoning models as
building blocks for multi-agent systems in causal inference, and demonstrate the
importance of diverse perspectives in causal problem-solving.
