Title: Enforcing Temporal Constraints for LLM Agents
Authors: Adharsh Kamath, Sishen Zhang, Calvin Xu, Shubham Ugare, Gagandeep Singh et al.
ID: 2512.23738
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.23738

Abstract:
LLM-based agents are deployed in safety-critical applications, yet current
guardrail systems fail to prevent violations of temporal safety policies,
requirements that govern the ordering and sequencing of agent actions. For
instance, agents may access sensitive data before authenticating users or
process refunds to unauthorized payment methods, violations that require
reasoning about sequences of action rather than an individual action. Existing
guardrails rely on imprecise natural language instructions or post-hoc
monitoring, and provide no formal guarantees that agents will satisfy temporal
constraints. We present Agent-C, a novel framework that provides run-time
guarantees ensuring LLM agents adhere to formal temporal safety properties.
Agent-C introduces a domain-specific language for expressing temporal properties
(e.g., authenticate before accessing data), translates specifications to
first-order logic, and uses SMT solving to detect non-compliant agent actions
during token generation. When the LLM attempts to generate a non-compliant tool
call, Agent-C leverages constrained generation techniques to ensure that every
action generated by the LLM complies with the specification, and to generate a
compliant alternative to a non-compliant agent action. We evaluate Agent-C
across two real-world applications: retail customer service and airline ticket
reservation system, and multiple language models (open and closed-source). Our
results demonstrate that Agent-C achieves perfect safety (100% conformance, 0%
harm), while improving task utility compared to state-of-the-art guardrails and
unrestricted agents. On SoTA closed-source models, Agent-C improves conformance
(77.4% to 100% for Claude Sonnet 4.5 and 83.7% to 100% for GPT-5), while
simultaneously increasing utility (71.8% to 75.2% and 66.1% to 70.6%,
respectively), representing a new SoTA frontier for reliable agentic reasoning.
