Title: An Empirical Study of Deep Learning Sentiment Detection Tools for Software Engineering in Cross-Platform Settings
Authors: Gias Uddin, Md Abdullah Al Alamin, Ajoy Das
ID: 2301.06661
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.06661

Abstract:
Sentiment detection in software engineering (SE) has shown promise to support
diverse development activities. However, given the diversity of SE platforms,
SE-specific sentiment detection tools may suffer in performance in
cross-platform settings. Recently deep learning (DL)-based SE-specific sentiment
detection tools are found to offer superior performance than shallow machine
learning (ML) based/rule-based tools. However, it is not known how the DL tools
perform in cross-platform settings. In this paper, we study whether SE-specific
DL sentiment detectors are more effective than shallow ML-based/rule-based
sentiment detectors in cross-platform settings. In three datasets, we study
three DL tools (SEntiMoji, BERT4SEntiSE, RNN4SentiSE) and compare those against
three baselines: two shallow learning tools (Senti4SD, SentiCR) and one
rule-based tool (SentistrengthSE). We find that (1) The deep learning SD tools
for SE, BERT4SentiSE outperform other supervised tools in cross-platform
settings in most cases, but then the tool is outperformed by the rule-based tool
SentistrengthSE in most cases. (2) BERT4SentiSE outperforms SentistrengthSE by
large margin in within-platform settings across the three datasets and is only
narrowly outperformed by SentiStrengthSE in four out of the six cross-platform
settings. This finding offers hope for the feasibility to further improve a
pre-trained transformer model like BERT4SentiSE in cross-platform settings. (3)
The two best-performing deep learning tools (BERT4SentiSE and SentiMoji) show
varying level performance drop across the three datasets. We find that this
inconsistency is mainly due to the "subjectivity in annotation" and performance
improvement for the studied supervised tools in cross-platform settings may
require the fixing of the datasets.
