Title: A systematic literature review of capstone courses in software engineering
Authors: Saara Tenhunen, Tomi Männistö, Matti Luukkainen, Petri Ihantola
ID: 2301.03554
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.03554

Abstract:
Tertiary education institutions aim to prepare their computer science and
software engineering students for working life. While much of the technical
principles are covered in lower-level courses, team-based capstone projects are
a common way to provide students with hands-on experience and teach soft skills.
This paper explores the characteristics of software engineering capstone courses
presented in the literature. The goal of this work is to understand the pros and
cons of different approaches by synthesising the various aspects of software
engineering capstone courses and related experiences. In a systematic literature
review for 2007-2022, we identified 127 primary studies. These studies were
analysed based on their presented course characteristics and the reported course
outcomes. The characteristics were synthesised into a taxonomy consisting of
duration, team sizes, client and project sources, project implementation, and
student assessment. We found out that capstone courses generally last one
semester and divide students into groups of 4-5 where they work on a project for
a client. For a slight majority of courses, the clients are external to the
course staff and students are often expected to produce a proof-of-concept level
software product as the main end deliverable. The courses also offer versatile
assessments for students throughout the project. This paper provides researchers
and educators with a classification of characteristics of software engineering
capstone courses based on previous research. We further synthesise insights on
the reported outcomes of capstone courses. Our review study aims to help
educators to identify various ways of organising capstones and effectively plan
and deliver their own capstone courses. The characterisation also helps
researchers to conduct further studies on software engineering capstones.
