Title: Do Performance Aspirations Matter for Guiding Software Configuration Tuning?
Authors: Tao Chen, Miqing Li
ID: 2301.03290
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.03290

Abstract:
Configurable software systems can be tuned for better performance. Leveraging on
some Pareto optimizers, recent work has shifted from tuning for a single,
time-related performance objective to two intrinsically different objectives
that assess distinct performance aspects of the system, each with varying
aspirations. Before we design better optimizers, a crucial engineering decision
to make therein is how to handle the performance requirements with clear
aspirations in the tuning process. For this, the community takes two alternative
optimization models: either quantifying and incorporating the aspirations into
the search objectives that guide the tuning, or not considering the aspirations
during the search but purely using them in the later decision-making process
only. However, despite being a crucial decision that determines how an optimizer
can be designed and tailored, there is a rather limited understanding of which
optimization model should be chosen under what particular circumstance, and why.
In this paper, we seek to close this gap. Firstly, we do that through a review
of over 426 papers in the literature and 14 real-world requirements datasets.
Drawing on these, we then conduct a comprehensive empirical study that covers 15
combinations of the state-of-the-art performance requirement patterns, four
types of aspiration space, three Pareto optimizers, and eight real-world
systems/environments, leading to 1,296 cases of investigation. We found that (1)
the realism of aspirations is the key factor that determines whether they should
be used to guide the tuning; (2) the given patterns and the position of the
realistic aspirations in the objective landscape are less important for the
choice, but they do matter to the extents of improvement; (3) the available
tuning budget can also influence the choice for unrealistic aspirations but it
is insignificant under realistic ones.
