Title: Doubly transitive equiangular tight frames that contain regular simplices
Authors: Matthew Fickus, Evan C. Lake
ID: 2302.08879
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.08879

Abstract:
An equiangular tight frame (ETF) is a finite sequence of equal norm vectors in a
Hilbert space that achieves equality in the Welch bound, and so has minimal
coherence. The binder of an ETF is the set of all subsets of its indices whose
corresponding vectors form a regular simplex. An ETF achieves equality in Donoho
and Elad's spark bound if and only if its binder is nonempty. When this occurs,
its binder is the set of all linearly dependent subsets of it of minimal size.
Moreover, if members of the binder form a balanced incomplete block design
(BIBD) then its incidence matrix can be phased to produce a sparse
representation of its dual (Naimark complement). A few infinite families of ETFs
are known to have this remarkable property. In this paper, we relate this
property to the recently introduced concept of a doubly transitive equiangular
tight frame (DTETF), namely an ETF for which the natural action of its symmetry
group is doubly transitive. In particular, we show that the binder of any DTETF
is either empty or forms a BIBD, and moreover that when the latter occurs, any
member of the binder of its dual is an oval of this BIBD. We then apply this
general theory to certain known infinite families of DTETFs. Specifically, any
symplectic form on a finite vector space yields a DTETF, and we compute the
binder of it and its dual, showing that the former is empty except in a single
notable case, and that the latter consists of affine Lagrangian subspaces. This
unifies and generalizes several results from the existing literature. We then
consider the binders of four infinite families of DTETFs that arise from
quadratic forms over the field of two elements, showing that two of these are
empty except in a finite number of cases, whereas the other two form BIBDs that
relate to each other, and to Lagrangian subspaces, in nonobvious ways.
