Title: Benchmarking scalability of stream processing frameworks deployed as microservices in the cloud
Authors: Sören Henning, Wilhelm Hasselbring
ID: 2303.11088
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.11088

Abstract:
Context: The combination of distributed stream processing with microservice
architectures is an emerging pattern for building data-intensive software
systems. In such systems, stream processing frameworks such as Apache Flink,
Apache Kafka Streams, Apache Samza, Hazelcast Jet, or the Apache Beam SDK are
used inside microservices to continuously process massive amounts of data in a
distributed fashion. While all of these frameworks promote scalability as a core
feature, there is only little empirical research evaluating and comparing their
scalability. Objective: The goal of this study to obtain evidence about the
scalability of state-of-the-art stream processing framework in different
execution environments and regarding different scalability dimensions. Method:
We benchmark five modern stream processing frameworks regarding their
scalability using a systematic method. We conduct over 740 hours of experiments
on Kubernetes clusters in the Google cloud and in a private cloud, where we
deploy up to 110 simultaneously running microservice instances, which process up
to one million messages per second. Results: All benchmarked frameworks exhibit
approximately linear scalability as long as sufficient cloud resources are
provisioned. However, the frameworks show considerable differences in the rate
at which resources have to be added to cope with increasing load. There is no
clear superior framework, but the ranking of the frameworks depends on the use
case. Using Apache Beam as an abstraction layer still comes at the cost of
significantly higher resource requirements regardless of the use case. We
observe our results regardless of scaling load on a microservice, scaling the
computational work performed inside the microservice, and the selected cloud
environment. Moreover, vertical scaling can be a complementary measure to
achieve scalability of stream processing frameworks.
