Title: Deep Learning Based Code Generation Methods: Literature Review
Authors: Zezhou Yang, Sirong Chen, Cuiyun Gao, Zhenhao Li, Ge Li et al.
ID: 2303.01056
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.01056

Abstract:
This paper focuses on Code Generation task that aims at generating relevant code
fragments according to given natural language descriptions. In the process of
software development, developers often encounter two scenarios. One is requested
to write a large amount of repetitive and low-technical code for implementing
common functionalities. The other is writing code that depends on specific task
requirements, which may necessitate the use of external resources such as
documentation or other tools. Therefore, code generation has received a lot of
attention among academia and industry for assisting developers in coding. In
fact, it has also been one of the key concerns in the field of software
engineering to make machines understand users' requirements and write programs
on their own. The recent development of deep learning techniques especially
pre-training models make the code generation task achieve promising performance.
In this paper, we systematically review the current work on deep learning-based
code generation and classify the current deep learning-based code generation
methods into three categories: methods based on code features, methods
incorporated with retrieval, and methods incorporated with post-processing. The
first category refers to the methods that use deep learning algorithms for code
generation based on code features, and the second and third categories of
methods improve the performance of the methods in the first category. In this
paper, the existing research results of each category of methods are
systematically reviewed, summarized and commented. Besides, the paper summarizes
and analyzes the corpus and the popular evaluation metrics used in the existing
code generation work. Finally, the paper summarizes the overall literature
review and provides a prospect on future research directions worthy of
attention.
