Title: Minimize Web Applications vulnerabilities through the early Detection of CRLF Injection
Authors: MD Asibul Hasan, Md. Mijanur Rahman
ID: 2303.02567
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.02567

Abstract:
Carriage return (CR) and line feed (LF), also known as CRLF injection is a type
of vulnerability that allows a hacker to enter special characters into a web
application, altering its operation or confusing the administrator. Log
poisoning and HTTP response splitting are two prominent harmful uses of this
technique. Additionally, CRLF injection can be used by an attacker to exploit
other vulnerabilities, such as cross-site scripting (XSS). According to Open Web
Application Security Project (OWASP), CRLF vulnerabilities are among the top 10
vulnerabilities and are a type of injection attack. Automated testing can help
to quickly identify CRLF vulnerabilities, and is particularly useful for
companies to test their applications before releasing them. However, CRLF
vulnerabilities foster a better approach to mitigate CRLF vulnerabilities in the
early stage and help secure applications against high-risk known
vulnerabilities. There has been less research on CRLF vulnerabilities and how to
detect them with automated testing. There is room for further research to be
done on this subject matter in order to develop creative solutions to problems.
It will also help to reduce false positive alerts by checking the header
response of each request. Security automation is an important issue for
companies trying to protect themselves against security threats. Automated
alerts from security systems can provide a quicker and more accurate
understanding of potential vulnerabilities and can help to reduce false positive
alerts. Despite the extensive research on various types of vulnerabilities in
web applications, CRLF vulnerabilities have only recently been included in the
research. Utilizing automated testing as a recurring task can assist companies
in receiving consistent updates about their systems and enhance their security.
