Title: Exploring the Relationship Between Ownership and Contribution Alignment and Code Technical Debt
Authors: Ehsan Zabardast, Javier Gonzalez-Huerta, Francis Palma, Panagiota Chatzipetrou
ID: 2304.02140
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.02140

Abstract:
Software development organisations aim to stay effective and efficient amid
growing system complexity. To address this, they often form small teams focused
on separate components that can be independently developed, tested, and
deployed. Aligning architecture with organisational structures is crucial for
effective communication and collaboration, reducing code and architectural
degradation. Assigning specific component responsibility to the teams primarily
working on them is key to these goals. This article explores the relationship
between ownership and contribution alignment and code quality degradation,
measured as technical debt per line of code. It also examines how team structure
changes impact their ability to manage code quality degradation. We conducted a
case study in a company developing a large software system, analysing ten
components managed by one team. This team was later split into two,
redistributing components between the new teams. Archival data from development
tools used in their daily operations was collected. Before the split, there was
a statistically significant negative correlation between contribution alignment
and technical debt density in four components, indicating that higher
contribution alignment leads to lower technical debt density and better code
quality. After the split, this negative correlation persisted in three
components, while five components showed a positive correlation, suggesting that
low contribution alignment might worsen code quality degradation. Our findings
suggest that contribution alignment is important in controlling code quality
degradation in software development organisations. Ensuring teams are
responsible for components they are most familiar with and minimising
dependencies between teams can help mitigate code quality degradation.
