Title: RoboREIT: an Interactive Robotic Tutor with Instructive Feedback Component for Requirements Elicitation Interview Training
Authors: Binnur Görer, Fatma Başak Aydemir
ID: 2304.07538
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.07538

Abstract:
[Context] Interviewing stakeholders is the most popular requirements elicitation
technique among multiple methods. The success of an interview depends on the
collaboration of the interviewee which can be fostered through the interviewer's
preparedness and communication skills. Mastering these skills requires
experience and practicing interviews. [Problem] Practical training is
resource-heavy as it calls for the time and effort of a stakeholder for each
student which may not be feasible for a large number of students. [Method] To
address this scalability problem, this paper proposes RoboREIT, an interactive
Robotic tutor for Requirements Elicitation Interview Training. The humanoid
robotic component of RoboREIT responds to the questions of the interviewer,
which the interviewer chooses from a set of predefined alternatives for a
particular scenario. After the interview session, RoboREIT provides contextual
feedback to the interviewer on their performance and allows the student to
inspect their mistakes. RoboREIT is extensible with various scenarios. [Results]
We performed an exploratory user study to evaluate RoboREIT and demonstrate its
applicability in requirements elicitation interview training. The quantitative
and qualitative analyses of the users' responses reveal the appreciation of
RoboREIT and provide further suggestions about how to improve it. [Contribution]
Our study is the first in the literature that utilizes a social robot in
requirements elicitation interview education. RoboREIT's innovative design
incorporates replaying faulty interview stages and allows the student to learn
from mistakes by a second time practicing. All participants praised the feedback
component, which is not present in the state-of-the-art, for being helpful in
identifying the mistakes. A favorable response rate of 81% for the system's
usefulness indicates the positive perception of the participants.
