Title: Human Error Management in Requirements Engineering: Should We Fix the People, the Processes, or the Environment?
Authors: Sweta Mahaju, Jeffrey C. Carver, Gary L. Bradshaw
ID: 2304.02702
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.02702

Abstract:
Context: Software development is human-centric and vulnerable to human error.
Human errors are errors in the human thought process. To ensure software
quality, practitioners must understand how to manage these human errors.
Organizations often change the requirements engineering process to prevent human
errors from occurring or to mitigate the harm caused when those errors do occur.
While there are studies on human error management in other disciplines, research
on the prevention and mitigation of human errors in software engineering, and
requirements engineering specifically, are limited. The software engineering
studies do not provide strong results about the types of changes that are most
effective in requirements engineering. Objective: The goal of this paper is to
develop a taxonomy of human error prevention and mitigation strategies based on
data from requirements engineering professionals. Method: We performed a
qualitative analysis of two practitioner surveys on requirements engineering
practices to identify and classify strategies for the prevention and mitigation
of human errors. Results: We organized the human error management strategies
into a taxonomy based on whether they primarily affect People, Processes, or the
Environment. Inside each high-level category, we further organized the
strategies into low-level classes. More than 50% of the reported strategies
require a change in Process, 23% require a change in Environment, 21% require a
change in People, with the remaining 5% too ambiguous to classify. In addition,
more than 50\% of the strategies focus on Management activities. Conclusions:
The Human Error Management Taxonomy provides a systematic classification and
organization of strategies for prevention and mitigation of human errors in
requirements engineering. This systematic organization provides a foundation
upon which research can build.
