Title: Password-Based Authentication and The Experiences of End Users
Authors: Assumpta Ezugwu, Elochukwu Ukwandu, Celestine Ugwu, Modesta Ezema, Comfort Olebara et al.
ID: 2305.18909
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.18909

Abstract:
Passwords are used majorly for end-user authentication in information and
communication technology (ICT) systems due to its perceived ease of use. The use
for end-user authentication extends through mobile, computers and network-based
products and services. But with the attendant issues relating to password hacks,
leakages, and theft largely due to weak, reuse and poor password habits of
end-users, the call for passwordless authentication as alternative intensifies.
All the same, there are missing knowledge of whether these password-based
experiences are associated with societal economic status, educational
qualification of citizens, their age and gender, technological advancements, and
depth of penetration. In line with the above, understanding the experience of
end-users in developing economy to ascertain their password-based experience has
become of interest to the researchers. This paper aims at measuring the
experience of staff and students in University communities within southeastern
Nigeria on password-based authentication systems. These communities have
population whose age brackets are majorly within the ages of 16 and 60 years;
have people with requisite educational qualifications ranging from Diploma to
Doctorate degrees and constitutes good number of ICT tools consumers. The survey
had 291 respondents, and collected data about age, educational qualifications,
and gender from these respondents. It also collected information about their
password experience in social media network, online shopping, electronic health
care services, and internet banking. Our analysis using SPSS and report by means
of descriptive statistics, frequency distribution, and Chi-Square tests showed
that account compromise in the geographical area is not common with the
respondents reporting good experience with passwords usage.
