Title: A Systematic Mapping Study and Practitioner Insights on the Use of Software Engineering Practices to Develop MVPs
Authors: Silvio Alonso, Marcos Kalinowski, Bruna Ferreira, Simone D. J. Barbosa, Helio Lopes
ID: 2305.08299
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.08299

Abstract:
[Background] The MVP concept has influenced the way in which development teams
apply Software Engineering practices. However, the overall understanding of this
influence of MVPs on SE practices is still poor. [Objective] Our goal is to
characterize the publication landscape on practices that have been used in the
context of software MVPs and to gather practitioner insights on the identified
practices. [Method] We conducted a systematic mapping study and discussed its
results in two focus groups sessions involving twelve industry practitioners
that extensively use MVPs in their projects to capture their perceptions on the
findings of the mapping study. [Results] We identified 33 papers published
between 2013 and 2020 and observed some trends related to MVP ideation and
evaluation practices. For instance, regarding ideation, we found six different
approaches and mainly informal end-user involvement practices. Regarding
evaluation, there is an emphasis on end-user validations based on practices such
as usability tests, A/B testing, and usage data analysis. However, there is
still limited research related to MVP technical feasibility assessment and
effort estimation. Practitioners of the focus group sessions reinforced the
confidence in our results regarding ideation and evaluation practices, being
aware of most of the identified practices. They also reported how they deal with
the technical feasibility assessments and effort estimation in practice.
[Conclusion] Our analysis suggests that there are opportunities for solution
proposals and evaluation studies to address literature gaps concerning technical
feasibility assessment and effort estimation. Overall, more effort needs to be
invested into empirically evaluating the existing MVP-related practices.
