Title: A Study of Documentation for Software Architecture
Authors: Neil A. Ernst, Martin P. Robillard
ID: 2305.17286
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.17286

Abstract:
Documentation is an important mechanism for disseminating software architecture
knowledge. Software project teams can employ vastly different formats for
documenting software architecture, from unstructured narratives to standardized
documents. We explored to what extent this documentation format may matter to
newcomers joining a software project and attempting to understand its
architecture. We conducted a controlled questionnaire-based study wherein we
asked 65 participants to answer software architecture understanding questions
using one of two randomly-assigned documentation formats: narrative essays, and
structured documents. We analyzed the factors associated with answer quality
using a Bayesian ordered categorical regression and observed no significant
association between the format of architecture documentation and performance on
architecture understanding tasks. Instead, prior exposure to the source code of
the system was the dominant factor associated with answer quality. We also
observed that answers to questions that require applying and creating activities
were statistically significantly associated with the use of the system's source
code to answer the question, whereas the document format or level of familiarity
with the system were not. Subjective sentiment about the documentation format
was comparable: Although more participants agreed that the structured document
was easier to navigate and use for writing code, this relation was not
statistically significant. We conclude that, in the limited experimental context
studied, our results contradict the hypothesis that the format of architectural
documentation matters. We surface two more important factors related to
effective use of software architecture documentation: prior familiarity with the
source code, and the type of architectural information sought.
