Title: Quantifying Process Quality: The Role of Effective Organizational Learning in Software Evolution
Authors: Sebastian Hönel
ID: 2305.18061
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.18061

Abstract:
Real-world software applications must constantly evolve to remain relevant. This
evolution occurs when developing new applications or adapting existing ones to
meet new requirements, make corrections, or incorporate future functionality.
Traditional methods of software quality control involve software quality models
and continuous code inspection tools. These measures focus on directly assessing
the quality of the software. However, there is a strong correlation and
causation between the quality of the development process and the resulting
software product. Therefore, improving the development process indirectly
improves the software product, too. To achieve this, effective learning from
past processes is necessary, often embraced through post mortem organizational
learning. While qualitative evaluation of large artifacts is common, smaller
quantitative changes captured by application lifecycle management are often
overlooked. In addition to software metrics, these smaller changes can reveal
complex phenomena related to project culture and management. Leveraging these
changes can help detect and address such complex issues. Software evolution was
previously measured by the size of changes, but the lack of consensus on a
reliable and versatile quantification method prevents its use as a dependable
metric. Different size classifications fail to reliably describe the nature of
evolution. While application lifecycle management data is rich, identifying
which artifacts can model detrimental managerial practices remains uncertain.
Approaches such as simulation modeling, discrete events simulation, or Bayesian
networks have only limited ability to exploit continuous-time process models of
such phenomena. Even worse, the accessibility and mechanistic insight into such
gray- or black-box models are typically very low. To address these challenges,
we suggest leveraging objectively [...]
