Title: Joint Sensing, Communication, and AI: A Trifecta for Resilient THz User Experiences
Authors: Christina Chaccour, Walid Saad, Merouane Debbah, H. Vincent Poor
ID: 2305.00135
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.00135

Abstract:
In this paper a novel joint sensing, communication, and artificial intelligence
(AI) framework is proposed so as to optimize extended reality (XR) experiences
over terahertz (THz) wireless systems. The proposed framework consists of three
main components. First, a tensor decomposition framework is proposed to extract
unique sensing parameters for XR users and their environment by exploiting then
THz channel sparsity. Essentially, THz band's quasi-opticality is exploited and
the sensing parameters are extracted from the uplink communication signal,
thereby allowing for the use of the same waveform, spectrum, and hardware for
both communication and sensing functionalities. Then, the Cramer-Rao lower bound
is derived to assess the accuracy of the estimated sensing parameters. Second, a
non-autoregressive multi-resolution generative artificial intelligence (AI)
framework integrated with an adversarial transformer is proposed to predict
missing and future sensing information. The proposed framework offers robust and
comprehensive historical sensing information and anticipatory forecasts of
future environmental changes, which are generalizable to fluctuations in both
known and unforeseen user behaviors and environmental conditions. Third, a
multi-agent deep recurrent hysteretic Q-neural network is developed to control
the handover policy of reconfigurable intelligent surface (RIS) subarrays,
leveraging the informative nature of sensing information to minimize handover
cost, maximize the individual quality of personal experiences (QoPEs), and
improve the robustness and resilience of THz links. Simulation results show a
high generalizability of the proposed unsupervised generative AI framework to
fluctuations in user behavior and velocity, leading to a 61 % improvement in
instantaneous reliability compared to schemes with known channel state
information.
