Title: Mitigating ML Model Decay in Continuous Integration with Data Drift Detection: An Empirical Study
Authors: Ali Kazemi Arani, Triet Huynh Minh Le, Mansooreh Zahedi, Muhammad Ali Babar
ID: 2305.12736
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.12736

Abstract:
Background: Machine Learning (ML) methods are being increasingly used for
automating different activities, e.g., Test Case Prioritization (TCP), of
Continuous Integration (CI). However, ML models need frequent retraining as a
result of changes in the CI environment, more commonly known as data drift.
Also, continuously retraining ML models consume a lot of time and effort. Hence,
there is an urgent need of identifying and evaluating suitable approaches that
can help in reducing the retraining efforts and time for ML models used for TCP
in CI environments. Aims: This study aims to investigate the performance of
using data drift detection techniques for automatically detecting the retraining
points for ML models for TCP in CI environments without requiring detailed
knowledge of the software projects. Method: We employed the Hellinger distance
to identify changes in both the values and distribution of input data and
leveraged these changes as retraining points for the ML model. We evaluated the
efficacy of this method on multiple datasets and compared the APFDc and NAPFD
evaluation metrics against models that were regularly retrained, with careful
consideration of the statistical methods. Results: Our experimental evaluation
of the Hellinger distance-based method demonstrated its efficacy and efficiency
in detecting retraining points and reducing the associated costs. However, the
performance of this method may vary depending on the dataset. Conclusions: Our
findings suggest that data drift detection methods can assist in identifying
retraining points for ML models in CI environments, while significantly reducing
the required retraining time. These methods can be helpful for practitioners who
lack specialized knowledge of software projects, enabling them to maintain ML
model accuracy.
