Title: Psychological Aspects of Pair Programming
Authors: Marcel Valový
ID: 2306.07421
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.07421

Abstract:
With the recent advent of artificially intelligent pairing partners in software
engineering, it is interesting to renew the study of the psychology of pairing.
Pair programming provides an attractive way of teaching software engineering to
university students. Its study can also lead to a better understanding of the
needs of professional software engineers in various programming roles and for
the improvement of the concurrent pairing software. Objective: This preliminary
study aimed to gain quantitative and qualitative insights into pair programming,
especially students' attitudes towards its specific roles and what they require
from the pairing partners. The research's goal is to use the findings to design
further studies on pairing with artificial intelligence. Method: Using a
mixed-methods and experimental approach, we distinguished the effects of the
pilot, navigator, and solo roles on (N = 35) students' intrinsic motivation.
Four experimental sessions produced a rich data corpus in two software
engineering university classrooms. It was quantitatively investigated using the
Shapiro-Wilk normality test and one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) to confirm
the relations and significance of variations in mean intrinsic motivation in
different roles. Consequently, seven semi-structured interviews were conducted
with the experiment's participants. The qualitative data excerpts were subjected
to the thematic analysis method in an essentialist way. Results: The systematic
coding interview transcripts elucidated the research topic by producing seven
themes for understanding the psychological aspects of pair programming and for
its improvement in university classrooms. Statistical analysis of 612
self-reported intrinsic motivation inventories confirmed that students find
programming in pilot-navigator roles more interesting and enjoyable than
programming simultaneously.
