Title: Predicting the Impact of Batch Refactoring Code Smells on Application Resource Consumption
Authors: Asif Imran, Tevfik Kosar, Jaroslaw Zola, Muhammed Fatih Bulut
ID: 2306.15763
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.15763

Abstract:
Automated batch refactoring has become a de-facto mechanism to restructure
software that may have significant design flaws negatively impacting the code
quality and maintainability. Although automated batch refactoring techniques are
known to significantly improve overall software quality and maintainability,
their impact on resource utilization is not well studied. This paper aims to
bridge the gap between batch refactoring code smells and consumption of
resources. It determines the relationship between software code smell batch
refactoring, and resource consumption. Next, it aims to design algorithms to
predict the impact of code smell refactoring on resource consumption. This paper
investigates 16 code smell types and their joint effect on resource utilization
for 31 open source applications. It provides a detailed empirical analysis of
the change in application CPU and memory utilization after refactoring specific
code smells in isolation and in batches. This analysis is then used to train
regression algorithms to predict the impact of batch refactoring on CPU and
memory utilization before making any refactoring decisions. Experimental results
also show that our ANN-based regression model provides highly accurate
predictions for the impact of batch refactoring on resource consumption. It
allows the software developers to intelligently decide which code smells they
should refactor jointly to achieve high code quality and maintainability without
increasing the application resource utilization. This paper responds to the
important and urgent need of software engineers across a broad range of software
applications, who are looking to refactor code smells and at the same time
improve resource consumption. Finally, it brings forward the concept of resource
aware code smell refactoring to the most crucial software applications.
