Title: Exploring Security Commits in Python
Authors: Shiyu Sun, Shu Wang, Xinda Wang, Yunlong Xing, Elisa Zhang et al.
ID: 2307.11853
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.11853

Abstract:
Python has become the most popular programming language as it is friendly to
work with for beginners. However, a recent study has found that most security
issues in Python have not been indexed by CVE and may only be fixed by 'silent'
security commits, which pose a threat to software security and hinder the
security fixes to downstream software. It is critical to identify the hidden
security commits; however, the existing datasets and methods are insufficient
for security commit detection in Python, due to the limited data variety,
non-comprehensive code semantics, and uninterpretable learned features. In this
paper, we construct the first security commit dataset in Python, namely PySecDB,
which consists of three subsets including a base dataset, a pilot dataset, and
an augmented dataset. The base dataset contains the security commits associated
with CVE records provided by MITRE. To increase the variety of security commits,
we build the pilot dataset from GitHub by filtering keywords within the commit
messages. Since not all commits provide commit messages, we further construct
the augmented dataset by understanding the semantics of code changes. To build
the augmented dataset, we propose a new graph representation named CommitCPG and
a multi-attributed graph learning model named SCOPY to identify the security
commit candidates through both sequential and structural code semantics. The
evaluation shows our proposed algorithms can improve the data collection
efficiency by up to 40 percentage points. After manual verification by three
security experts, PySecDB consists of 1,258 security commits and 2,791
non-security commits. Furthermore, we conduct an extensive case study on PySecDB
and discover four common security fix patterns that cover over 85% of security
commits in Python, providing insight into secure software maintenance,
vulnerability detection, and automated program repair.
