Title: Bridging MDE and AI: A Systematic Review of Domain-Specific Languages and Model-Driven Practices in AI Software Systems Engineering
Authors: Simon Raedler, Luca Berardinelli, Karolin Winter, Abbas Rahimi, Stefanie Rinderle-Ma
ID: 2307.04599
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.04599

Abstract:
Background:Technical systems are growing in complexity with more components and
functions across various disciplines. Model-Driven Engineering (MDE) helps
manage this complexity by using models as key artifacts. Domain-Specific
Languages (DSL) supported by MDE facilitate modeling. As data generation in
product development increases, there's a growing demand for AI algorithms, which
can be challenging to implement. Integrating AI algorithms with DSL and MDE can
streamline this process. Objective:This study aims to investigate the existing
model-driven approaches relying on DSL in support of the engineering of AI
software systems to sharpen future research further and define the current state
of the art. Method:We conducted a Systemic Literature Review (SLR), collecting
papers from five major databases resulting in 1335 candidate studies, eventually
retaining 18 primary studies. Each primary study will be evaluated and discussed
with respect to the adoption of MDE principles and practices and the phases of
AI development support aligned with the stages of the CRISP-DM methodology.
Results:The study's findings show that language workbenches are of paramount
importance in dealing with all aspects of modeling language development and are
leveraged to define DSL explicitly addressing AI concerns. The most prominent
AI-related concerns are training and modeling of the AI algorithm, while minor
emphasis is given to the time-consuming preparation of the data. Early project
phases that support interdisciplinary communication of requirements, e.g.,
CRISP-DM Business Understanding phase, are rarely reflected. Conclusion:The
study found that the use of MDE for AI is still in its early stages, and there
is no single tool or method that is widely used. Additionally, current
approaches tend to focus on specific stages of development rather than providing
support for the entire development process.
