Title: Exploring Technical Debt in Security Questions on Stack Overflow
Authors: Joshua Aldrich Edbert, Sahrima Jannat Oishwee, Shubhashis Karmakar, Zadia Codabux, Roberto Verdecchia
ID: 2307.11387
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.11387

Abstract:
Background: Software security is crucial to ensure that the users are protected
from undesirable consequences such as malware attacks which can result in loss
of data and, subsequently, financial loss. Technical Debt (TD) is a metaphor
incurred by suboptimal decisions resulting in long-term consequences such as
increased defects and vulnerabilities if not managed. Although previous studies
have studied the relationship between security and TD, examining their
intersection in developers' discussion on Stack Overflow (SO) is still
unexplored. Aims: This study investigates the characteristics of
security-related TD questions on SO. More specifically, we explore the
prevalence of TD in security-related queries, identify the security tags most
prone to TD, and investigate which user groups are more aware of TD. Method: We
mined 117,233 security-related questions on SO and used a deep-learning approach
to identify 45,078 security-related TD questions. Subsequently, we conducted
quantitative and qualitative analyses of the collected security-related TD
questions, including sentiment analysis. Results: Our analysis revealed that 38%
of the security questions on SO are security-related TD questions. The most
recurrent tags among the security-related TD questions emerged as "security" and
"encryption." The latter typically have a neutral sentiment, are lengthier, and
are posed by users with higher reputation scores. Conclusions: Our findings
reveal that developers implicitly discuss TD, suggesting developers have a
potential knowledge gap regarding the TD metaphor in the security domain.
Moreover, we identified the most common security topics mentioned in TD-related
posts, providing valuable insights for developers and researchers to assist
developers in prioritizing security concerns in order to minimize TD and enhance
software security.
