Title: Collaborative, Code-Proximal Dynamic Software Visualization within Code Editors
Authors: Alexander Krause-Glau, Wilhelm Hasselbring
ID: 2308.15785
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.15785

Abstract:
Software visualizations are usually realized as standalone and isolated tools
that use embedded code viewers within the visualization. In the context of
program comprehension, only few approaches integrate visualizations into code
editors, such as integrated development environments. This is surprising since
professional developers consider reading source code as one of the most
important ways to understand software, therefore spend a lot of time with code
editors. In this paper, we introduce the design and proof-of-concept
implementation for a software visualization approach that can be embedded into
code editors. Our contribution differs from related work in that we use dynamic
analysis of a software system's runtime behavior. Additionally, we incorporate
distributed tracing. This enables developers to understand how, for example, the
currently handled source code behaves as a fully deployed, distributed software
system. Our visualization approach enhances common remote pair programming tools
and is collaboratively usable by employing shared code cities. As a result, user
interactions are synchronized between code editor and visualization, as well as
broadcasted to collaborators. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
approach that combines code editors with collaboratively usable code cities.
Therefore, we conducted a user study to collect first-time feedback regarding
the perceived usefulness and perceived usability of our approach. We
additionally collected logging information to provide more data regarding time
spent in code cities that are embedded in code editors. Seven teams with two
students each participated in that study. The results show that the majority of
participants find our approach useful and would employ it for their own use. We
provide each participant's video recording, raw results, and all steps to
reproduce our experiment as supplementary package.
