Title: Inclusive-PIM: Hardware-Software Co-design for Broad Acceleration on Commercial PIM Architectures
Authors: Johnathan Alsop, Shaizeen Aga, Mohamed Ibrahim, Mahzabeen Islam, Andrew Mccrabb et al.
ID: 2309.07984
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.07984

Abstract:
Continual demand for memory bandwidth has made it worthwhile for memory vendors
to reassess processing in memory (PIM), which enables higher bandwidth by
placing compute units in/near-memory. As such, memory vendors have recently
proposed commercially viable PIM designs. However, these proposals are largely
driven by the needs of (a narrow set of) machine learning (ML) primitives. While
such proposals are reasonable given the the growing importance of ML, as memory
is a pervasive component, %in this work, we make there is a case for a more
inclusive PIM design that can accelerate primitives across domains. In this
work, we ascertain the capabilities of commercial PIM proposals to accelerate
various primitives across domains. We first begin with outlining a set of
characteristics, termed PIM-amenability-test, which aid in assessing if a given
primitive is likely to be accelerated by PIM. Next, we apply this test to
primitives under study to ascertain efficient data-placement and orchestration
to map the primitives to underlying PIM architecture. We observe here that, even
though primitives under study are largely PIM-amenable, existing commercial PIM
proposals do not realize their performance potential for these primitives. To
address this, we identify bottlenecks that arise in PIM execution and propose
hardware and software optimizations which stand to broaden the acceleration
reach of commercial PIM designs (improving average PIM speedups from 1.12x to
2.49x relative to a GPU baseline). Overall, while we believe emerging commercial
PIM proposals add a necessary and complementary design point in the application
acceleration space, hardware-software co-design is necessary to deliver their
benefits broadly.
