Title: Forensics and security issues in the Internet of Things
Authors: Shams Forruque Ahmed, Shanjana Shuravi, Afsana Bhuyian, Shaila Afrin, Aanushka Mehjabin et al.
ID: 2309.02707
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.02707

Abstract:
Given the exponential expansion of the internet, the possibilities of security
attacks and cybercrimes have increased accordingly. However, poorly implemented
security mechanisms in the Internet of Things (IoT) devices make them
susceptible to cyberattacks, which can directly affect users. IoT forensics is
thus needed to investigate and mitigate such attacks. While many works have
examined IoT applications and challenges, only a few have focused on both the
forensic and security issues in IoT. Therefore, this paper reviews forensic and
security issues associated with IoT in different fields. Prospects and
challenges in IoT research and development are also highlighted. As the
literature demonstrates, most IoT devices are vulnerable to attacks due to a
lack of standardized security measures. Unauthorized users could get access,
compromise data, and even benefit from control of critical infrastructure. To
fulfill the security-conscious needs of consumers, IoT can be used to develop a
smart home system by designing the security-conscious needs of consumers; IoT
can be used to create a smart home system by designing an IoT can be used to
develop a smart home system by designing a FLIP-based system that is highly
scalable and adaptable. A blockchain-based authentication mechanism with a
multi-chain structure can provide additional security protection between
different trust domains. Deep learning can be utilized to develop a network
forensics framework with a high-performing system for detecting and tracking
cyberattack incidents. Moreover, researchers should consider limiting the amount
of data created and delivered when using big data to develop IoT-based smart
systems. The findings of this review will stimulate academics to seek potential
solutions for the identified issues, thereby advancing the IoT field.
