Title: Semantic Code Graph -- an information model to facilitate software comprehension
Authors: Krzysztof Borowski, Bartosz Baliś, Tomasz Orzechowski
ID: 2310.02128
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.02128

Abstract:
Software comprehension can be extremely time-consuming due to the ever-growing
size of codebases. Consequently, there is an increasing need to accelerate the
code comprehension process to facilitate maintenance and reduce associated
costs. A crucial aspect of this process is understanding and preserving the high
quality of the code dependency structure. While a variety of code structure
models already exist, there is a surprising lack of models that closely
represent the source code and focus on software comprehension. As a result,
there are no readily available and easy-to-use tools to assist with dependency
comprehension, refactoring, and quality monitoring of code. To address this gap,
we propose the Semantic Code Graph (SCG), an information model that offers a
detailed abstract representation of code dependencies with a close relationship
to the source code. To validate the SCG model's usefulness in software
comprehension, we compare it to nine other source code representation models.
Additionally, we select 11 well-known and widely-used open-source projects
developed in Java and Scala and perform a range of software comprehension
activities on them using three different code representation models: the
proposed SCG, the Call Graph (CG), and the Class Collaboration Network (CCN). We
then qualitatively analyze the results to compare the performance of these
models in terms of software comprehension capabilities. These activities
encompass project structure comprehension, identifying critical project
entities, interactive visualization of code dependencies, and uncovering code
similarities through software mining. Our findings demonstrate that the SCG
enhances software comprehension capabilities compared to the prevailing CCN and
CG models. We believe that the work described is a step towards the next
generation of tools that streamline code dependency comprehension and
management.
