Title: Status Quo and Problems of Requirements Engineering for Machine Learning: Results from an International Survey
Authors: Antonio Pedro Santos Alves, Marcos Kalinowski, Görkem Giray, Daniel Mendez, Niklas Lavesson et al.
ID: 2310.06726
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06726

Abstract:
Systems that use Machine Learning (ML) have become commonplace for companies
that want to improve their products and processes. Literature suggests that
Requirements Engineering (RE) can help address many problems when engineering
ML-enabled systems. However, the state of empirical evidence on how RE is
applied in practice in the context of ML-enabled systems is mainly dominated by
isolated case studies with limited generalizability. We conducted an
international survey to gather practitioner insights into the status quo and
problems of RE in ML-enabled systems. We gathered 188 complete responses from 25
countries. We conducted quantitative statistical analyses on contemporary
practices using bootstrapping with confidence intervals and qualitative analyses
on the reported problems involving open and axial coding procedures. We found
significant differences in RE practices within ML projects. For instance, (i)
RE-related activities are mostly conducted by project leaders and data
scientists, (ii) the prevalent requirements documentation format concerns
interactive Notebooks, (iii) the main focus of non-functional requirements
includes data quality, model reliability, and model explainability, and (iv)
main challenges include managing customer expectations and aligning requirements
with data. The qualitative analyses revealed that practitioners face problems
related to lack of business domain understanding, unclear goals and
requirements, low customer engagement, and communication issues. These results
help to provide a better understanding of the adopted practices and of which
problems exist in practical environments. We put forward the need to adapt
further and disseminate RE-related practices for engineering ML-enabled systems.
