Title: Requirements' Characteristics: How do they Impact on Project Budget in a Systems Engineering Context?
Authors: Panagiota Chatzipetrou, Michael Unterkalmsteiner, Tony Gorschek
ID: 2310.01395
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01395

Abstract:
Background: Requirements engineering is of a principal importance when starting
a new project. However, the number of the requirements involved in a single
project can reach up to thousands. Controlling and assuring the quality of
natural language requirements (NLRs), in these quantities, is challenging. Aims:
In a field study, we investigated with the Swedish Transportation Agency (STA)
to what extent the characteristics of requirements had an influence on change
requests and budget changes in the project. Method: We choose the following
models to characterize system requirements formulated in natural language:
Concern-based Model of Requirements (CMR), Requirements Abstractions Model (RAM)
and Software-Hardware model (SHM). The classification of the NLRs was conducted
by the three authors. The robust statistical measure Fleiss' Kappa was used to
verify the reliability of the results. We used descriptive statistics,
contingency tables, results from the Chi-Square test of association along with
post hoc tests. Finally, a multivariate statistical technique, Correspondence
analysis was used in order to provide a means of displaying a set of
requirements in two-dimensional graphical form. Results: The results showed that
software requirements are associated with less budget cost than hardware
requirements. Moreover, software requirements tend to stay open for a longer
period indicating that they are "harder" to handle. Finally, the more discussion
or interaction on a change request can lower the actual estimated change request
cost. Conclusions: The results lead us to a need to further investigate the
reasons why the software requirements are treated differently from the hardware
requirements, interview the project managers, understand better the way those
requirements are formulated and propose effective ways of Software management.
