Title: Factoring Expertise, Workload, and Turnover into Code Review Recommendation
Authors: Fahimeh Hajari, Samaneh Malmir, Ehsan Mirsaeedi, Peter C. Rigby
ID: 2312.17236
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.17236

Abstract:
Developer turnover is inevitable on software projects and leads to knowledge
loss, a reduction in productivity, and an increase in defects. Mitigation
strategies to deal with turnover tend to disrupt and increase workloads for
developers. In this work, we suggest that through code review recommendation we
can distribute knowledge and mitigate turnover while more evenly distributing
review workload. We conduct historical analyses to understand the natural
concentration of review workload and the degree of knowledge spreading that is
inherent in code review. Even though review workload is highly concentrated, we
show that code review natural spreads knowledge thereby reducing the files at
risk to turnover. Using simulation, we evaluate existing code review
recommenders and develop novel recommenders to understand their impact on the
level of expertise during review, the workload of reviewers, and the files at
risk to turnover. Our simulations use seeded random replacement of reviewers to
allow us to compare the reviewer recommenders without the confounding variation
of different reviewers being replaced for each recommender. Combining
recommenders, we develop the SofiaWL recommender that suggests experts with low
active review workload when none of the files under review are known by only one
developer. In contrast, when knowledge is concentrated on one developer, it
sends the review to other reviewers to spread knowledge. For the projects we
study, we are able to globally increase expertise during reviews, +3%, reduce
workload concentration, -12%, and reduce the files at risk, -28%. We make our
scripts and data available in our replication package. Developers can optimize
for a particular outcome measure based on the needs of their project, or use our
GitHub bot to automatically balance the outcomes.
