Title: Team-related Features in Code Review Prediction Models
Authors: Eduardo Witter, Ingrid Nunes, Dietmar Jannach
ID: 2312.06244
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.06244

Abstract:
Modern Code Review (MCR) is an informal tool-assisted quality assurance
practice. It relies on the asynchronous communication among the authors of code
changes and reviewers, who are developers that provide feedback. However, from
candidate developers, some are able to provide better feedback than others given
a particular context. The selection of reviewers is thus an important task,
which can benefit from automated support. Many approaches have been proposed in
this direction, using for example data from code review repositories to
recommend reviewers. In this paper, we propose the use of team-related features
to improve the performance of predictions that are helpful to build code
reviewer recommenders, with our target predictions being the identification of
reviewers that would participate in a review and the provided amount of
feedback. We evaluate the prediction power of these features, which are related
to code ownership, workload, and team relationship. This evaluation was done by
carefully addressing challenges imposed by the MCR domain, such as temporal
aspects of the dataset and unbalanced classes. Moreover, given that it is
currently unknown how much past data is needed for building MCR prediction
models with acceptable performance, we explore the amount of past data used to
build prediction models. Our results show that, individually, features related
to code ownership have the best prediction power. However, based on feature
selection, we conclude that all proposed features together with lines of code
can make the best predictions for both reviewer participation and amount of
feedback. Regarding the amount of past data, the timeframes of 3, 6, 9, and 12
months of data produce similar results. Therefore, models can be trained
considering short timeframes, thus reducing the computational costs with
negligible impact in the prediction performance ...
