Title: EasyView: Bringing Performance Profiles into Integrated Development Environments
Authors: Qidong Zhao, Milind Chabbi, Xu Liu
ID: 2312.16598
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.16598

Abstract:
Dynamic program analysis (also known as profiling) is well-known for its
powerful capabilities of identifying performance inefficiencies in software
packages. Although a large number of dynamic program analysis techniques are
developed in academia and industry, very few of them are widely used by software
developers in their regular software developing activities. There are three
major reasons. First, the dynamic analysis tools (also known as profilers) are
disjoint from the coding environments such as IDEs and editors; frequently
switching focus between them significantly complicates the entire cycle of
software development. Second, mastering various tools to interpret their
analysis results requires substantial efforts; even worse, many tools have their
own design of graphical user interfaces (GUI) for data presentation, which
steepens the learning curves. Third, most existing tools expose few interfaces
to support user-defined analysis, which makes the tools less customizable to
fulfill diverse user demands. We develop EasyView, a general solution to
integrate the interpretation and visualization of various profiling results in
the coding environments, which bridges software developers with profilers to
provide easy and intuitive dynamic analysis during the code development cycle.
The novelty of EasyView is three-fold. First, we develop a generic data format,
which enables EasyView to support mainstream profilers for different languages.
Second, we develop a set of customizable schemes to analyze and visualize the
profiles in intuitive ways. Third, we tightly integrate EasyView with popular
coding environments, such as Microsoft Visual Studio Code, with easy code
exploration and user interaction. Our evaluation shows that EasyView is able to
support various profilers for different languages and provide unique insights
into performance inefficiencies in different domains.
