Title: Psychometric evaluation of adult attachment measures on Turkish samples and a cross-cultural comparison
Authors: Nebi Sümer, Derya Güngör
ID: openalex.W2519787016
URL: https://lirias.kuleuven.be/handle/123456789/261525

In recent years, adult attachment styles (secure, fearful, preoccupied, and
dismissing) have been widely investigated within the framework of four-category
model (Bartholomew and Horowitz, 1991). In three consecutive studies, the
reliability and validity of two commonly used measures of attachment styles were
examined on the Turkish sample and a cross-cultural comparison with a U.S.
sample was made. Results of the Study I revealed that both the single and multi-
item measures of attachment styles (Relationships Questionnaire; Re and
Relationships Scales Questionnaire; RSQ) have satisfactory level of reliability,
stability and convergent validity. However these two measures did not correspond
bl classifying respondents into the four attachment groups in an acceptable
degree. Study 2, first, replicated the results of study I and second,
demonstrated that the four attachment styles can be sufficiently identified
among Turkish students. Supporting the construct validity of the attachment
scales, findings indicated that the four attachment styles were organized around
the two underlying dimensions of attachment (models of self and others), and
they were related to the outcome variables employed in the study consistent with
the assumptions of attachment, theory. The final study permitted a comparison of
Turkish sample with American students from the perspective of four- category
model. It was found that although the attachment scales had compatible
psychometric quality in both cultures, the RSQ was relatively more consistent
than the Re across the two samples. Furthermore, cultural differences in
attachment styles were found especially among the insecure styles and students
with preoccupied styles in the Turkish sample and those with dismissing and
fearful styles in the American sample seemed to be overrepresented Findings were
discussed in the light of attachment literature regarding the measurement issues
and cross-cultural differences.
