Title: From the Pursuit of Universal AGI Architecture to Systematic Approach to Heterogenous AGI: Addressing Alignment, Energy, & AGI Grand Challenges
Authors: Eren Kurshan
ID: 2310.15274
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.15274

Abstract:
Artificial intelligence (AI) faces a trifecta of grand challenges: the Energy Wall, the Alignment Problem and the Leap from Narrow AI to AGI. We present SAGI, a Systematic Approach to AGI that utilizes system design principles to overcome the energy wall and alignment challenges. This paper asserts that AGI can be realized through multiplicity of design specific pathways and customized through system design rather than a singular overarching architecture. AGI systems may exhibit diver architectural configurations and capabilities, contingent upon their intended use cases. Alignment, a challenge broadly recognized as AIs most formidable, is the one that depends most critically on system design and serves as its primary driving force as a foundational criterion for AGI. Capturing the complexities of human morality for alignment requires architectural support to represent the intricacies of moral decision-making and the pervasive ethical processing at every level, with performance reliability exceeding that of human moral judgment. Hence, requiring a more robust architecture towards safety and alignment goals, without replicating or resembling the human brain.
  We argue that system design (such as feedback loops, energy and performance optimization) on learning substrates (capable of learning its system architecture) is more fundamental to achieving AGI goals and guarantees, superseding classical symbolic, emergentist and hybrid approaches. Through learning of the system architecture itself, the resulting AGI is not a product of spontaneous emergence but of systematic design and deliberate engineering, with core features, including an integrated moral architecture, deeply embedded within its architecture. The approach aims to guarantee design goals such as alignment, efficiency by self-learning system architecture.
