Title: Enhancing Cognitive Workload Classification Using Integrated LSTM Layers and CNNs for fNIRS Data Analysis
Authors: Mehshan Ahmed Khan, Houshyar Asadi, Mohammad Reza Chalak Qazani, Adetokunbo Arogbonlo, Siamak Pedrammehr, Adnan Anwar, Asim Bhatti, Saeid Nahavandi, Chee Peng Lim
ID: 2407.15901
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.15901

Abstract:
Functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) is employed as a non-invasive method to monitor functional brain activation by capturing changes in the concentrations of oxygenated haemoglobin (HbO) and deoxygenated haemo-globin (HbR). Various machine learning classification techniques have been utilized to distinguish cognitive states. However, conventional machine learning methods, although simpler to implement, undergo a complex pre-processing phase before network training and demonstrate reduced accuracy due to inadequate data preprocessing. Additionally, previous research in cog-nitive load assessment using fNIRS has predominantly focused on differ-sizeentiating between two levels of mental workload. These studies mainly aim to classify low and high levels of cognitive load or distinguish between easy and difficult tasks. To address these limitations associated with conven-tional methods, this paper conducts a comprehensive exploration of the im-pact of Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) layers on the effectiveness of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) within deep learning models. This is to address the issues related to spatial features overfitting and lack of tem-poral dependencies in CNN in the previous studies. By integrating LSTM layers, the model can capture temporal dependencies in the fNIRS data, al-lowing for a more comprehensive understanding of cognitive states. The primary objective is to assess how incorporating LSTM layers enhances the performance of CNNs. The experimental results presented in this paper demonstrate that the integration of LSTM layers with Convolutional layers results in an increase in the accuracy of deep learning models from 97.40% to 97.92%.
