Title: A Digital Twin-based Intelligent Network Architecture for Underwater Acoustic Sensor Networks
Authors: Shanshan Song, Bingwen Huangfu, Jiani Guo, Jun Liu, Junhong Cui,  Xuemin,  Shen
ID: 2410.20151
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.20151

Abstract:
Underwater acoustic sensor networks (UASNs) drive toward strong environmental adaptability, intelligence, and multifunctionality. However, due to unique UASN characteristics, such as long propagation delay, dynamic channel quality, and high attenuation, existing studies present untimeliness, inefficiency, and inflexibility in real practice. Digital twin (DT) technology is promising for UASNs to break the above bottlenecks by providing high-fidelity status prediction and exploring optimal schemes. In this article, we propose a Digital Twin-based Network Architecture (DTNA), enhancing UASNs' environmental adaptability, intelligence, and multifunctionality. By extracting real UASN information from local (node) and global (network) levels, we first design a layered architecture to improve the DT replica fidelity and UASN control flexibility. In local DT, we develop a resource allocation paradigm (RAPD), which rapidly perceives performance variations and iteratively optimizes allocation schemes to improve real-time environmental adaptability of resource allocation algorithms. In global DT, we aggregate decentralized local DT data and propose a collaborative Multi-agent reinforcement learning framework (CMFD) and a task-oriented network slicing (TNSD). CMFD patches scarce real data and provides extensive DT data to accelerate AI model training. TNSD unifies heterogeneous tasks' demand extraction and efficiently provides comprehensive network status, improving the flexibility of multi-task scheduling algorithms. Finally, practical and simulation experiments verify the high fidelity of DT. Compared with the original UASN architecture, experiment results demonstrate that DTNA can: (i) improve the timeliness and robustness of resource allocation; (ii) greatly reduce the training time of AI algorithms; (iii) more rapidly obtain network status for multi-task scheduling at a low cost.
