Title: Augmented Intelligence in Smart Intersections: Local Digital Twins-Assisted Hybrid Autonomous Driving
Authors: Kui Wang, Kazuma Nonomura, Zongdian Li, Tao Yu, Kei Sakaguchi, Omar Hashash, Walid Saad, Changyang She, Yonghui Li
ID: 2410.12163
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.12163

Abstract:
Vehicle-road collaboration is a promising approach for enhancing the safety and efficiency of autonomous driving by extending the intelligence of onboard systems to smart roadside infrastructures. The introduction of digital twins (DTs), particularly local DTs (LDTs) at the edge, in smart mobility presents a new embodiment of augmented intelligence, which could enhance information exchange and extract human driving expertise to improve onboard intelligence. This paper presents a novel LDT-assisted hybrid autonomous driving system for improving safety and efficiency in traffic intersections. By leveraging roadside units (RSUs) equipped with sensory and computing capabilities, the proposed system continuously monitors traffic, extracts human driving knowledge, and generates intersection-specific local driving agents through an offline reinforcement learning (RL) framework. When connected and automated vehicles (CAVs) pass through RSU-equipped intersections, RSUs can provide local agents to support safe and efficient driving in local areas. Meanwhile, they provide real-time cooperative perception (CP) to broaden onboard sensory horizons. The proposed LDT-assisted hybrid system is implemented with state-of-the-art products, e.g., CAVs and RSUs, and technologies, e.g., millimeter-wave (mmWave) communications. Hardware-in-the-loop (HiL) simulations and proof-of-concept (PoC) tests validate system performance from two standpoints: (i) The peak latency for CP and local agent downloading are 8.51 ms and 146 ms, respectively, aligning with 3GPP requirements for vehicle-to-everything (V2X) and model transfer use cases. Moreover, (ii) local driving agents can improve safety measures by 10% and reduce travel time by 15% compared with conventional onboard systems. The implemented prototype also demonstrates reliable real-time performance, fulfilling the targets of the proposed system design.
