Title: Lessons for GenAI Literacy From a Field Study of Human-GenAI Augmentation in the Workplace
Authors: Aditya Johri, Johannes Schleiss, Nupoor Ranade
ID: 2502.00567
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.00567

Abstract:
Generative artificial intelligence (GenAI) is increasingly becoming a part of work practices across the technology industry and being used across a range of industries. This has necessitated the need to better understand how GenAI is being used by professionals in the field so that we can better prepare students for the workforce. An improved understanding of the use of GenAI in practice can help provide guidance on the design of GenAI literacy efforts including how to integrate it within courses and curriculum, what aspects of GenAI to teach, and even how to teach it. This paper presents a field study that compares the use of GenAI across three different functions - product development, software engineering, and digital content creation - to identify how GenAI is currently being used in the industry. This study takes a human augmentation approach with a focus on human cognition and addresses three research questions: how is GenAI augmenting work practices; what knowledge is important and how are workers learning; and what are the implications for training the future workforce. Findings show a wide variance in the use of GenAI and in the level of computing knowledge of users. In some industries GenAI is being used in a highly technical manner with deployment of fine-tuned models across domains. Whereas in others, only off-the-shelf applications are being used for generating content. This means that the need for what to know about GenAI varies, and so does the background knowledge needed to utilize it. For the purposes of teaching and learning, our findings indicated that different levels of GenAI understanding needs to be integrated into courses. From a faculty perspective, the work has implications for training faculty so that they are aware of the advances and how students are possibly, as early adopters, already using GenAI to augment their learning practices.
