Title: Dynamic Programming Techniques for Enhancing Cognitive Representation in Knowledge Tracing
Authors: Lixiang Xu, Xianwei Ding, Xin Yuan, Richang Hong, Feiping Nie, Enhong Chen, Philip S. Yu
ID: 2506.02949
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.02949

Abstract:
Knowledge Tracing (KT) involves monitoring the changes in a student's knowledge over time by analyzing their past responses, with the goal of predicting future performance. However, most existing methods primarily focus on feature enhancement, while overlooking the deficiencies in cognitive representation and the ability to express cognition-issues often caused by interference from non-cognitive factors such as slipping and guessing. This limitation hampers the ability to capture the continuity and coherence of the student's cognitive process. As a result, many methods may introduce more prediction bias and modeling costs due to their inability to maintain cognitive continuity and coherence. Based on the above discussion, we propose the Cognitive Representation Dynamic Programming based Knowledge Tracing (CRDP-KT) model. This model em ploys a dynamic programming algorithm to optimize cognitive representations based on the difficulty of the questions and the performance intervals between them. This approach ensures that the cognitive representation aligns with the student's cognitive patterns, maintaining overall continuity and coherence. As a result, it provides more accurate and systematic input features for subsequent model training, thereby minimizing distortion in the simulation of cognitive states. Additionally, the CRDP-KT model performs partitioned optimization of cognitive representations to enhance the reliability of the optimization process. Furthermore, it improves its ability to express the student's cognition through a weighted fusion of optimized record representations and re lationships learned from a bipartite graph. Finally, experiments conducted on three public datasets validate the effectiveness of the proposed CRDP-KT model.
