Title: Three-dimentional reconstruction of complex, dynamic population canopy architecture for crops with a novel point cloud completion model: A case study in Brassica napus rapeseed
Authors: Ziyue Guo, Xin Yang, Yutao Shen, Yang Zhu, Lixi Jiang, Haiyan Cen
ID: 2506.18292
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.18292

Abstract:
Quantitative descriptions of the complete canopy architecture are essential for accurately evaluating crop photosynthesis and yield performance to guide ideotype design. Although various sensing technologies have been developed for three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction of individual plants and canopies, they failed to obtain an accurate description of canopy architectures due to severe occlusion among complex canopy architectures. We proposed an effective method for 3D reconstruction of complex, dynamic population canopy architecture for rapeseed crops with a novel point cloud completion model. A complete point cloud generation framework was developed for automated annotation of the training dataset by distinguishing surface points from occluded points within canopies. The crop population point cloud completion network (CP-PCN) was then designed with a multi-resolution dynamic graph convolutional encoder (MRDG) and a point pyramid decoder (PPD) to predict occluded points. To further enhance feature extraction, a dynamic graph convolutional feature extractor (DGCFE) module was proposed to capture structural variations over the whole rapeseed growth period. The results demonstrated that CP-PCN achieved chamfer distance (CD) values of 3.35 cm -4.51 cm over four growth stages, outperforming the state-of-the-art transformer-based method (PoinTr). Ablation studies confirmed the effectiveness of the MRDG and DGCFE modules. Moreover, the validation experiment demonstrated that the silique efficiency index developed from CP-PCN improved the overall accuracy of rapeseed yield prediction by 11.2% compared to that of using incomplete point clouds. The CP-PCN pipeline has the potential to be extended to other crops, significantly advancing the quantitatively analysis of in-field population canopy architectures.
