Title: Prevalencia del VIH en niños, niñas y adolescentes en situación de calle y explotación sexual comercial: una revisión sistemática
Authors: Camilo Noreña-Herrera, Carlos Rojas, Lizeth Cruz-Jiménez
ID: openalex.W2546548807
URL: https://doi.org/10.1590/0102-311x00134315

The aim of this review was to describe HIV prevalence in children and youth
living on the street and subject to commercial sexual exploitation, and the
studies' characteristics in terms of place, time, population, and sample design.
This was a systematic review, not a meta-analysis, based on an article search in
10 electronic databases: Science Direct, MEDLINE, OVID, LILACS, Wiley
InterScience, MD Consult, Springer Link, Embase, Web of Science, and Ebsco. A
complementary search was also performed in the libraries of schools of public
health and webpages of U.N. agencies, besides the reference lists from the
selected articles. We selected observational studies focused on children and
youth living on the street and subject to commercial sexual exploitation,
ranging in age from 10 to 20 years, with the results for HIV prevalence rates. A
total of 9,829 references were retrieved, of which 15 met the inclusion criteria
and comprise this descriptive summary. Of these 15 articles, 12 were conducted
in children and youth living on the street and three in children subject to
commercial sexual exploitation. All 15 were cross-sectional studies. HIV
prevalence in children and youth living on the street ranged from 0% in Dallas,
USA and Cochabamba, Bolivia to 37.4% in St. Petersburg, Russia. In children and
youth living subject to commercial sexual exploitation, prevalence ranged from
2% in Toronto, Canada to 20% in Kolkata, India. In conclusion, HIV infection is
present in children and youth living on the street and subject to commercial
sexual exploitation. Measures are needed for prevention, diagnosis, and
treatment as a public health priority and an ethical responsibility on the part
of governments and society.
