Title: Integrated design concept in civil engineering education
Authors: Bárbara Rangel, Ana Sofia Guimarães, Ana Vaz Sá, Fernando Brandão
ID: openalex.W3045353667
URL: https://hdl.handle.net/10216/86541

The current difficulties in the Construction Industry have confirmed the urgent
need for interdisciplinary between all the design disciplines, from engineering
to architecture. The requirement for high levels of building eciency and the
optimization of the building process is making increasing demands on the
accuracy of designs. The project is no longer a sum of contributions, but a
design methodology that combines the answers to all the diÄerent requisites of
the building, an integrated design project. This multidisciplinary approach to
design problems is only possible if it is present in the design process from the
outset. This implicit complicity is only possible if it starts in university
education, searching for a unique common language of construction. This article
shows an example of the implementation of integrated project delivery (IPD)
methodology to the project based learning in civil engineer education. Exploring
the experience undertaken in last years in one of the courses of the Integrated
Master in Civil Engineering (MIEC) of the Faculty of Engineering of the
University of Porto, the implementation of the IPD methodology along lectures
and studio classes, proved to be a more ecient learning performance among
students in what concerns to the understanding of the relation between the
design process and the convergence of all engineering disciplines that have to
work together with the architecture design practice. Therefore, the methodology
implemented in the architecture course in the 2nd semester of the 2nd year (1st
cycle) of the MIEC, described in chapter 3, allows students to learn the design
methodology as an integrated disciplinary project and to become able to access
the available work tools, from project design to construction process. As a
result, the improvement in the students ability to acquire knowledge was clearly
visible in the increase of final grade average since the IPD methodology was
implemented in the course (2010/11). Also, students motivation for developing
extra homework became higher due to their initiative and commitment.
