Title: Proceedings of the 3rd Biennial Conference of the Society for Implementation Research Collaboration (SIRC) 2015: advancing efficient methodologies through community partnerships and team science
Authors: Cara C. Lewis, Doyanne Darnell, Suzanne E. U. Kerns, Maria Monroe‐DeVita, Sara J. Landes
ID: openalex.W2473520880
URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/s13012-016-0428-0

It is well documented that the majority of adults, children and families in need
of evidence-based behavioral health interventions i do not receive them [1, 2]
and that few robust empirically supported methods for implementing evidence-
based practices (EBPs) exist. The Society for Implementation Research
Collaboration (SIRC) represents a burgeoning effort to advance the innovation
and rigor of implementation research and is uniquely focused on bringing
together researchers and stakeholders committed to evaluating the implementation
of complex evidence-based behavioral health interventions. Through its diverse
activities and membership, SIRC aims to foster the promise of implementation
research to better serve the behavioral health needs of the population by
identifying rigorous, relevant, and efficient strategies that successfully
transfer scientific evidence to clinical knowledge for use in real world
settings [3]. SIRC began as a National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)-funded
conference series in 2010 (previously titled the "Seattle Implementation
Research Conference"; $150,000 USD for 3 conferences in 2011, 2013, and 2015)
with the recognition that there were multiple researchers and stakeholders i
working in parallel on innovative implementation science projects in behavioral
health, but that formal channels for communicating and collaborating with one
another were relatively unavailable. There was a significant need for a forum
within which implementation researchers and stakeholders could learn from one
another, refine approaches to science and practice, and develop an
implementation research agenda using common measures, methods, and research
principles to improve both the frequency and quality with which behavioral
health treatment implementation is evaluated. SIRC's membership growth is a
testament to this identified need with more than 1000 members from 2011 to the
present. ii SIRC's primary objectives are to: (1) foster communication and
collaboration across diverse groups, including implementation researchers,
intermediaries i , as well as community stakeholders (SIRC uses the term "EBP
champions" for these groups)and to do so across multiple career levels (e.g.,
students, early career faculty, established investigators); and (2) enhance and
disseminate rigorous measures and methodologies for implementing EBPs and
evaluating EBP implementation efforts. These objectives are well aligned with
Glasgow and colleagues ' [4] five core tenets deemed critical for advancing
implementation science: collaboration, efficiency and speed, rigor and
relevance, improved capacity, and cumulative knowledge. SIRC advances these
objectives and tenets through in-person conferences, which bring together
multidisciplinary implementation researchers and those implementing evidence-
based behavioral health interventions in the community to share their work and
create professional connections and collaborations.
