Title: Teachers as agents of change in curricular reform: the position of dance revisited
Authors: Justine MacLean
ID: openalex.W2547578313
URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/13573322.2016.1249464

This paper reports findings from a recent large-scale survey of Physical
Education (PE) teachers’ perceptions of teaching dance and compares them to
results of a study completed 10 years previously [MacLean, J. (2007). A
longitudinal study to ascertain the factors that impact on the confidence of
undergraduate physical education student teachers to teach dance in Scottish
schools. European Physical Education Review, 13(1), 99–116]. The current
position of dance is examined in light of the introduction of Curriculum for
Excellence (CfE) in 2010, a national initiative in Scottish schools that
provides a unified flexible curricular framework for children aged 3–18. Dance
remains part of the PE curriculum but also for the first time in Scotland
occupies an additional position within the Expressive Arts (EA). Teachers are
positioned as agents of change tasked with greater autonomy, flexibility and
responsibility in curriculum design. The inclusion of dance in both PE and EA
provides potential for teachers to design curricula that excludes dance from the
PE curriculum or alternatively use the opportunity to increase dance provision.
Currently, little is known about the impact CfE has on the provision and
position of dance or the factors that impinge on teachers’ decisions regarding
the inclusion of dance in the curriculum. To further such understanding, 85
secondary school PE teachers responded to a questionnaire concerning dance
opportunities within the current school context. In addition, the original
participants from MacLean (2007) research were re-interviewed to identify and
explore the factors that enable teachers to achieve agency when teaching dance.
The results indicated that collaborative planning, united goals and collective
action had enabled teachers to significantly increase dance provision in
schools. Teacher attention had shifted from concerns about individual capacity
to a focus on the level of social, cultural and material support in providing
valuable educational experiences in dance for all pupils.
