Title: Measuring Students' Attitudes towards Teachers' Use of Humour during Lessons: A Questionnaire Study
Authors: Arafat AbdAli, Najoom Ashur, Luma Ghazi, Ammar Muslim
ID: openalex.W2576622273
URL: http://iiste.org/Journals/index.php/JEP/article/view/34615

There is a common saying that if students like their teachers, they will start
liking the subjects taught by them and be more attentive in the class. ''A
strict teacher can be successful but a humorous teacher can be more successful''
(Vijay, et al, 2014:260-61). Hence, students' attitudes towards their
instructors and subjects taught by them are determined only by the teachers'
attitudes and their efficiency in delivering the contents. Not to mention,
teachers who adopt a light-hearted attitude are often rated higher than other
teachers not only based on the entertainment level, but also on credibility. The
purpose of this research is to measure the attitudes of fifth-year preparatory
schools students, males and females, towards teachers' use of humour during
lessons in the center of Basra city. It also investigates the advantages of
using humour in teaching contexts and its vital role in motivating students'
learning and improving their performance. Humour in this research refers to
anything which is said or creates a feeling of fun and amusement in the
classroom such as funny stories, funny comments, jokes or pun. Humour, according
to this research, is used to illustrate, encourage, reduce anxiety, and attract
students' attention. The population of the research consists of fifth-year
students studying at different Iraqi preparatory schools in the center of Basra
city. The research sample includes (100) males and females students in both
scientific and literary sections. The researchers use a questionnaire as a tool
of the research. Thus, a questionnaire of (21) items has been designed to be
distributed to (100) fifth-year preparatory school students, (51) males and (49)
females. The statistical means used by the researchers are the percentile ratio
for the approval of the jury, T-test for one independent sample, T-Test for two
equal independent samples and the weighted mean. To achieve the validity and
reliability of the research, it has been displayed on specialists in educational
guidance and psychology. The results of the research demonstrate that there is
statistically significant differences at significant level of (0.05). The
calculated T-value for the variable of humour is (8.305) and the tabulation
value is (1.660). Namely, the attitudes of students towards the variable of
humour is high which indicates that most of fifth-year preparatory school
students prefer the use of humour on the part of the teachers during lessons.
Regarding the difference between male and female students' attitudes towards the
use of humour by teachers according to the variable of gender, the results
reveal that there is statistically significant difference between males and
female students' attitudes towards the teachers' use of humour. The weighted
mean for males is (51.159) whereas the weighted mean for females is (48.122).
Using T-Test for two independent samples, it is shown that the difference
between males and female students is statistically significant at a level ((0.05
In other words, male students display positive attitudes towards the teachers'
use of humour during lessons more than the female students. Concerning the
difference between male and female students' attitudes towards the use of humour
by teachers according to the variable of Academic achievement, the results
reveal that there is no statistically significant difference between students in
both literary and scientific sections. The calculated T-value is (1.055) degree
and Tabulated T-value is (1.660) degree, which is not statistically significant
at the significance level of (0.05). This indicates that there is no differences
between the two sections. Keywords: Humour, Preparatory Schools, Benefits of
Humour
