Title: Scale: Discourse and Dimensions of Social Life
Authors: E. Summerson Carr, Michael Lempert
ID: openalex.W2518508064
URL: https://doi.org/10.1525/luminos.15

Wherever we turn, we see diverse things scaled for us, from cities to economies,
from history to love. We know scale by many names and through many familiar
antinomies: local and global, micro and macro events. Even the most critical
among us often proceed with our analysis as if such scales were the ready-made
platforms of social life, rather than asking how, why, and to what effect are
scalar distinctions forged in the first place. How do scalar distinctions help
actors and analysts alike make sense of and navigate their social worlds? What
do these distinctions reveal and what do they conceal? How are scales construed
and what effects do they have on the way those who abide by them think and act?
This pathbreaking volume attends to the practical labor of scale-making and the
communicative practices this labor requires. From an ethnographic perspective,
the authors demonstrate that scale is practice and process before it becomes
product, whether in the work of projecting the commons, claiming access to the
big picture, or scaling the seriousness of a crime. “How shall we fathom the
world, bringing its varied scales into analytic perspective? The authors
collected in this bold and subtle volume slow down the question, arguing that
‘scale’ is made, not born, and that ‘perspectives’ are semiotic accomplishments
and not stable points of anchor.” STEFAN HELMREICH, Elting E. Morison Professor
of Anthropology, MIT “<i>Scale</i> will be a fundamental book for thinking about
scalar processes. . . . Its engaging, readable chapters offer a range of
theoretical considerations of how scales arise and work in a variety of social
settings.” ROBERT OPPENHEIM, author of Kyongju Things: Assembling Place “This
highly original volume sheds new light on language and scale. . . . The authors
show how the scalar aspects of language and the linguistic dimensions of scale
work together to produce the social logic of extent.” ARJUN APPADURAI, Paulette
Goddard Professor of Media, Culture and Communication, New York University "This
groundbreaking collection of essays by leading linguistic anthropologists
demonstrates the vital contribution of semiotics to the ongoing
multidisciplinary theorizing of scale and scale-making." MIYAKO INOUE, author of
<i>Vicarious Language: Gender and Linguistic Modernity in Japan</i> E. SUMMERSON
CARR is Associate Professor, School of Social Service Administration, University
of Chicago. MICHAEL LEMPERT is Associate Professor of Anthropology, University
of Michigan.
