Title: بررسی رابطه هویت اجتماعی و سبک فرزندپروری مادران شهر ایلام
Authors: بیژن خواجه نوری, مهری مرادخانی, الهام شیردل, شهناز براتی
ID: openalex.W2583301505
URL: https://doaj.org/article/bd0f89d5462b451fac77912f6bc459ce

Introduction Parent-child interrelations comprise one of the important
discussions in psychology as well as social sciences with parenting styles as
one of the critical topics of the mentioned areas (Bagherpoor Kamachali, 2007:
34). Undoubtedly, family is the most important organization and the bedrock of
physical, mental, and social growth and welfare for a child, and the leading
factor for their (physical, mental and, social) balance. Socializing and
fraternizing with cultural laws, rules and values occurs naturally within the
family, setting the stage for the child to turn into a social being through
practicing preliminary intra-family interactions (Moosavi, 2003). In other
words, each of the parents has their own share of responsibilities in seeing
their child off and into a full-grown person, with most of the weight pertaining
to child nurturing and positive influence falling on the mother. Maternal
mental, physical and, social health as well as a healthy, well-defined identity,
therefore, is crucial in raising healthy children, with the mother being an
ever-present guide ever since the primary stages of a child’s life. To this end,
in this study, the relation between parenting styles and aspects of social
identity pertaining to Ilam city’s mothers has been brought under investigation.
First, previous studies related to the area were reviewed and Giddens’stheory
was selected as the framework for the investigation. As a next step, a total of
six hypotheses were presented based on a theory riding on Giddens’s opinions.
Material and Methods In order to put said hypotheses to test, 400 Ilam city’s
mothers were chosen through multistage random sampling. The investigative method
through which the study has been carried out is one of survey and questionnaire.
The produced results of ETA testing reveal a correlation between the two
variables under study, namely ‘aspects of social identity’ and ‘parenting
style’, with ‘maternal social identity’ and ‘authoritative parenting style’
being the most important among all other correlations. Discussion of results &
Conclusions Also the produced results at the logistic regression level and
parental statistics reveal that 71.6, 76.1, 80, 74 percent (respectively) of the
variables pertaining to the ‘authoritative’, ‘authoritarian’, ‘easy going’ and
‘permissive’ styles seem to be correctly predicted and classified. The results
of the investigation confirm that there has been a significant decrease in the
implementation of both ‘authoritarian’ and ‘permissive’ styles, in which the
child is overlooked altogether whereas the two methods ‘authoritative’ and ‘easy
going’ have been increasingly brought into use. The results further depict that
an upgrade in maternal social identity brings about the ‘authoritative’ as the
ideal style of choice in parenting by mothers. In fact, mothers with consistent
identities tend to have a better understanding of their own abilities which in
turn leads to a successful observation of both the ‘control’ and ‘affection’
aspects of parenting dynamics. A healthy growth of identity in mothers helps
them establish warm, amicable relationships among family members (Steinberg,
2001). Results from the studies by Monadi (2010), Khabaz (2010), Marcia
(2002)andLomeo (1999) are in line with one conducted here. In fact mothers who
have already established a consistent sexual, national, ethnic and group
identity, have implemented the ‘authoritative’ style in raising their children
which represents the healthiest in intra-family relationships. On the contrary,
identity crisis has led a second group to implement the ‘permissive’ style as
the least appropriate way to raise children. In the end, the results from this
study depict the consolidation of identity in Ilam city’s mothers and
consequently, their best choice of style in parenting.
