Title: Mediating Role of Resilience in Relationship Between Attachment Style Dimensions and Quality of Life in High School Students
Authors: Habibollah Naderi, Abbas Akbari, Roya Abbasi‐Asl
ID: openalex.W2464212077
URL: https://doi.org/10.17795/intjsh-36096

Background: One of the most fundamental constructs in the positive psychology is
the quality of life. Quality of life refers to the emotional, social and
physical health of individuals and their ability to do daily activities.
Objectives: The present study aimed to investigate the mediating role of
resilience in relationship between attachment styles and quality of life.
Materials and Methods: The population of the study consisted of all male and
female high school students in Babolsar, Iran, in the academic year 2014 - 2015.
Participants included 367 high school students (226 females and 141 males) from
Babolsar city, Iran, selected by multi-stage cluster sampling method.
Participants completed attachment styles, quality of life and resilience scales.
The research conceptual model was analyzed and assessed using simultaneous
sequential regression method and the steps proposed by Baron and Kenny (1986).
All analyses were performed by SPSS ver. 22 software.  Results: The obtained
results showed that: 1) the secure attachment style was a positive predictor of
resilience (P < 0.01) and quality of life (P < 0.01); 2) the insecure attachment
avoidant style was a negative predictor of resilience (P < 0.01) and the
insecure attachment ambivalent style was a negative predictor of resilience (P <
0.01) and quality of life (P < 0.01); 3) the resilience was a positive predictor
of quality of life (P < 0.01); 4) the resilience played the role of a partial
mediator between insecure attachment ambivalent style and quality of life; 5)
the resilience was a complete mediator between secure attachment style and
quality of life.  Conclusions: This finding confirms the resiliency theory
indicating that secure families bring up children resiliently and increase the
quality of their lives.
