Title: Social and Cultural Capital Predictors of Adolescents’ Financial Literacy: Family and School Influences
Authors: Adela García Aracil, Isabel Neira Gómez, Cecilia Albert
ID: openalex.W2569836559
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10261/161586

[EN] This study focuses on the effects of social and cultural capital on
15-year-old scholars' achievements in financial literacy. We use data from 13
OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development) countries
participating in the 2012 Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA
2012). The hierarchical structure of the PISA data allow us to examine the
influence of the socio-cultural capital components at the individual and school
level. For that purpose, different hierarchical liner models are estimated with
the aim to observe the differences among students in financial literacy
performance according to individual and school characteristics, highlighting
social and cultural capital issues. Therefore, multilevel models are adopted to
understand how adolescents' academic performance is influenced by family
background and school context. In general, our results show that both social and
cultural capital at the individual and school level affect positively to
student's financial literacy. In more detail, results indicate that families
with high levels of cultural capital and parents who encourage discussion of
social issues have a clear positive influence on adolescents' financial
literacy. The results also show a positive effect on the financial performance
of adolescents attending schools that offer music, drama, volunteering
programmes and maths competitions, combined with good student-teacher
relationships and good engagement of parents in school activities. The study
here proposed confirms that young scholars should not be considered as a
homogeneous group by policy makers designing instruments to foster and improve
children's financial literacy. In this sense, educational reforms must be
carefully considered. Although our focus is on a narrow set of cognitive
variables such as financial literacy, it is stress the need for more research to
complement this work. We need to consider socio-emotional outcome variables to
enable a more rounded study of adolescents' academic performance, including
their attitudes to school and to learning, among others.
