Title: Templegoing teens : the religiosity and identity of Buddhists growing up in Britain
Authors: Phra Nicholas Thanissaro
ID: openalex.W2395211034
URL: 

A quantitative study explored the values profile of teen self-identifying
Buddhists growing up in Britain and the degree to which religious affiliation,
sex, age, social class and convert or heritage religious style linked with
features of their Buddhist identity and values. A variety of attitude statements
including those concerning personal well-being, psychological type,
discrimination, the media, friends, work, school, Religious Education, family,
substance use, collectivism, tradition and religion, were rated for levels of
agreement using postal and online surveys of 417 self-identifying Buddhists aged
between 13 and 20. Likely antecedents of Buddhist identity were found to include
parenting style, spiritual teachers, temple training and ethos, shrines and
religious practice in the home, collectivism, cleavage against assimilation and
intuitive psychological type. Teen years saw a decline and relativising of
Buddhist values except for inspiration towards engaged Buddhism and spending
time in the monastic order. Likely consequences of Buddhist identity were found
to include impact on lifestyle, commitments and personality. Being Buddhist and
male was different from being Buddhist and female in that males were more
extraverted and ordination-oriented in their faith aspirations and less
concerned about their children growing up Buddhist. Lower class Buddhists were
more likely to be collectivist and traditional. Middle class Buddhists were more
vertical individualist and interested in a monastic vocation. In terms of
religious style, heritage Buddhists were found to be more extrinsic and
traditional in their religiosity than convert Buddhists for whom religiosity was
more intrinsic and reform orientated. This dissertation offers quantitative
evidence for individual differences between convert and heritage Buddhist styles
of religiosity and commends emphasising religious practice rather than beliefs,
scripture and spirituality when portraying Buddhism in school Religious
Education.
