Title: «Haz el amor, no la guerra». Experiencias de vida comunitaria como laboratorios de educación para la paz en Italia
Authors: Gianfranco Bandini
ID: openalex.W2774289384
URL: https://doi.org/10.14201/aula201622175188

The 1960s and 70s in Italy marked a moment of great discontinuity, change and
generational conflict. In these years of student protests, original and
alternative lifestyles came to light: young people wanted to personally engage
in a concrete and real experience of peace, brotherhood and sharing property
(and in some cases also personal affections), breaking out of the roles imposed
by the bourgeois family. The pacifism of these first Italian «communes»
eclectically mixed the American dream with Eastern spirituality; rebellion and
drug use with Marxist ideologies stemming from various sources. The result was a
substantially minority (but not fleeting) movement which had ties both with its
nineteenth-century predecessors (of both religious and socialist origin) and
with some subsequent interesting twentieth-century experiences, up to the
present day.The communitarian ideal took shape in some experiences which became
increasingly interconnected, and so went on to form an international movement.
While, in terms of numbers, the people choosing to live in communitarian form
(also in the recent eco-villages or cohousing) were few, their way of thinking
started to be shared by increasingly broad swathes of the population, with
evident effects on lifestyles (such as buying organic foods) and forms of
education. In particular, think of their refusal to do military service,
openness towards Eastern spirituality, vegetarianism, their ecological vision,
fight against vivisection and for animal rights, and so-called critical
consumption. In Italy, the latter aspect developed above all thanks to Francesco
Gesualdi, a pupil of Don Milani who pursued the ideal of a peace that was never
detached from justice: with his activity and writings he made consumers
responsible, engaging them in a form of non-violent protest against the waste
and violence of the economic world.Unfortunately, we must not forget that not
all the promises of brotherhood and communitarian joy were fulfilled. Some
communities, in the secrecy of their isolated world, practised forms of coercion
and violence, even against children. These cases, some of which have been
subject to criminal investigations by the judiciary, show how the danger is not
to be found in the drugs or the feared sexual promiscuity of the outset, but in
the very character itself of small communities, by definition different from the
rest of the social body and purposefully, physically separate. Such that,
paradoxically, in these communities’ history, violence and peace interweave.
