Title: Teachers' perceptions of education support structures in the implementation of inclusive education in South Africa
Authors: Norma Nel, Lloyd Daniel Nkoli Tlale, Petra Engelbrecht, Mirna Nel
ID: openalex.W2560012145
URL: https://doi.org/10.19108/koers.81.3.2249

Inclusive education forms the ethos of the education system in South Africa and
resonates with the Constitution of the country, which recognises diversity and
resists exclusivity. Inclusive education is also reflected in education policies
such as the Education White Paper 6: Special Education – Building an Inclusive
Education and Training System and the Screening, Identification, Assessment and
Support (SIAS) document. Pivotal to inclusive education is the provision of
support for all learners and teachers. The focus of this paper is on the
functionality of all the formal support structures that are in place for
teachers and learners from the teachers’ viewpoints. These support structures
include District-Based Support Teams (DBSTs), Institutional-Level Support Teams
(ILSTs), Full-Service Schools (FSS), Special Schools as Resource Centres (SSRC),
Learning Support Educators (LSEs) and the community. An interpretive research
paradigm was chosen, using convenience sampling and data was collected by means
of focus group interviews. Constant comparative data analysis was employed. Peer
review and member checks were used to ensure trustworthiness. The themes that
emerged were support provided by teachers, the role of official support
structures and special schools and community collaboration. It was evident, from
the teachers’ point of view, that the formal support structures are not as
effective as proposed by policy and educational authorities and that the policy
needs serious re-consideration. Inklusiewe onderwys vorm die etos van die
onderwysstelsel in Suid-Afrika en resoneer met die Grondwet van die land, wat
diversiteit erken en eksklusiwiteit weerstaan. Inklusiewe onderwys word ook
weerspieël in die onderwysbeleid soos uiteengesit in die Education White Paper
6: Special Education – Building an Inclusive Education and Training System and
the Screening, Identification, Assessment and Support (SIAS) dokument.
Deurslaggewend vir inklusiewe onderwys is die voorsiening van ondersteuning aan
alle leerders en onderwysers. Die fokus van hierdie artikel is op die funksies
van al die formele ondersteuningstrukture wat in plek is vir onderwysers en
leerders en weerspieël die standpunte van onderwysers. Hierdie
ondersteuningstrukture sluit in Distrikgebaseerde ondersteuningspanne;
Institusionele ondersteuningspanne, Voldiensskole; Spesiale skole as
hulpbronsentra; Leerondersteuningsopvoeders; inklusiewe onderwys en die
gemeenskap. ‘n Interpretatiewe navorsingsparadigma is gekies waarin
gerieflikheidsteekproefneming gedoen is en data ingesamel is met gebruik van
fokusgroeponderhoude. Eweknieen ledekontrole is gebruik om betroubaarheid te
verseker. Die temas wat na vore gekom het was ondersteuning deur onderwysers,
die rol van amptelike ondersteuningstrukture, spesiale skole en
gemeenskapsamewerking. Dit was duidelik, vanuit die onderwysers se gesigspunt,
dat die formele ondersteuningstrukture nie so effektief is as wat voorgehou word
deur die beleid en die onderwysowerhede nie, end at die beleid ernstige
herbesinning nodig het.
