Title: "Do you dance at work Mummy?" An ethnographic study of young children's perspectives of work.
Authors: F. McAlevey
ID: openalex.W2589034894
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10523/7021

This study foregrounds young children’s perspectives of work, allowing their
opinions, experiences and knowledge to become visible. It questions the ways in
which young children understand work, and what work means to young children.
&#13;\nWhen viewed in relation to children, the concept of work has a chequered
history. Researchers’ perspectives have alternated between presenting work as
‘good’ or ‘bad’ for children. However, children’s own perspectives of work are
largely missing from research literature. In particular, there is a gap in
research into young children’s perspectives of work in New Zealand. This study
seeks to fill part of that gap. &#13;\nIn the current study, fourteen young
children (ages 3-4) from two New Zealand early childhood education [ECE]
settings, shared their perspectives of work as part of a two-year ethnographic
research project. They actively participated in the research through taking
photographs and contributing to interviews. In addition, children photographed
work at home, and two families participated in home-based interviews. Additional
data were constructed through participant listening (Forsey, 2010) and
participant observation. A thematic analysis of the data was undertaken using
Rogoff’s (2003) framework of community, interpersonal and personal lenses.
&#13;\nSociocultural theory (Vygotsky, 1978) is used in this study to illustrate
that children’s learning about work draws on their own agency, together with the
skills and knowledge of those with more experience. Thus, work, when viewed as a
sociocultural activity, is neither good nor bad. It is simply an activity that
affects young children’s lives on a daily basis. The study also uses childhood
studies theory (Lenzer, 2001) to explain that how children are perceived, and
their subsequent access to participation in activities such as work, are largely
shaped by their relationships. Childhood studies theory also acknowledges that
children have a right to participate and that their perspectives are
valuable.&#13;\nThe young children in this study built knowledge of work through
observation in their ECE settings and homes. They learned about work through
guided participation (Rogoff, 2003) with more experienced workers. They
recognised that who was able to work and what they could work at, were affected
by values, beliefs and rules enacted in the contexts of ECE and home. Young
children in this study expressed a clear desire to be involved in work
themselves. It was relationships – with “people, places and things” (Ministry of
Education, 1996, p. 11) – that shaped their ability to participate in work. In
particular, the study identified that their participation was directly affected
by adult discourses about children. When adults believe that children should be
free from work, or that children are incompetent in relation to work, they limit
children’s opportunities to work (Morelli, Rogoff, &amp; Angelillo, 2003). In
contrast, many of the young children in this study were active participants in
work. The adults in their lives recognised their competence and the benefits
they gained from participation in work. \t&#13;\nThe current study helps to make
young children’s participation in work visible. It shows that young children
actively contribute to communities and argues that their participation should
not remain hidden. In addition, it recognises that young children are able to
share ideas about their worlds when provided with tools and opportunities to
participate. For young children in this study, the focus on cameras provided a
new means of communication. The study shows that using visual research methods
can potentially broaden young children’s ability to share feelings, ideas and
knowledge about their worlds.
