Title: Characteristics of Children in Foster Care, Family-Style Group Care, and Residential Care: A Scoping Review
Authors: Harmke Leloux-Opmeer, Chris Kuiper, Hanna Swaab, Evert Scholte
ID: openalex.W2339541623
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10826-016-0418-5

When risky child and family circumstances cannot be resolved at home,
(temporary) 24-h out-of-home placement of the child may be an alternative
strategy. To identify specific placement risks and needs, care professionals
must have information about the child and his or her family, care history, and
social-cultural characteristics at admission to out-of-home care. However, to
date information on case characteristics and particular their similarities and
differences across the three main types of out-of-home settings (namely foster
care, family-style group care, and residential care) is largely lacking. This
review compiles and compares characteristics of school-aged children of average
intelligence and their families at the time of each child's admission to one of
the three care modalities. A scoping review technique that provides a broad
search strategy and ensures sufficient coverage of the available literature is
used. Based on the 36 studies included, there is consensus that the majority of
normally intelligent children in care demonstrate severe developmental and
behavioral problems. However, the severeness as well as the kinds of defining
characteristics present differ among the children in foster care, family-style
group care, and residential care. The review also identifies several existing
knowledge gaps regarding relevant risk factors. Future research is recommended
to fill these gaps and determine the developmental pathway in relation to
children's risks and needs at admission. This will contribute to the development
of an evidence-based risks and needs assessment tool that will enable care
professionals to make informed referrals to a specific type of out-of-home care
when such a placement is required.
