Title: First-year readjustment to family culture: The roles of generation status and parental attachment on re-entry shock
Authors: Mary E. Anderson
ID: openalex.W2545867120
URL: 

First-generation college students face many challenges and many successes as the
first from their family to go to college. Although much research has been done
to support this population of students in the transition and adjustment to the
college culture, little research has been completed about the experiences they
face upon their return home to their family culture. Due to the lack of shared
experiences, first-generation college students may encounter an increase in
psychological issues when re-assimilating to their family culture after engaging
in the college culture. Because research has indicated that secure attachment
bonds lessen the impact of psychological symptoms such as stress, anxiety, and
isolation during the transition and adjustment period to college, it may be
possible that strong attachment decreases these same psychological issues during
the transition and adjustment back home. This study examined the differences of
the re-entry experiences of first-year college students based on generation
status to their family culture using a theoretical lens that investigated
theories of re-entry shock and parental attachment. The presence of secure
attachment bonds from family relationships and the impact of these bonds as they
relate to transition and adjustment home were also explored. The research design
considered the characteristics of gender and ethnicity and the role they played
on the dependent variables of re-entry shock and parental attachment. Although
the results of the study did not find statistically significant differences
between groups regarding re-entry shock, significant differences were found in
regard to parental attachment bonds based on gender and generation status.
Understanding differences in parental bonds will assist student affairs
practitioners in offering ongoing programs and services that not only assist
students in their transition back to their family culture, but may also make
parents and families more aware of the opportunities and challenges that their
students face throughout the college journey.
