Title: Differences in Determinants of Indirect Perpetrator and Victim Behaviour
Authors: Marzanna Farnická
ID: openalex.W2562982782
URL: https://doi.org/10.2174/1874350101609010149

Background: Studies on young children indicate that victims of indirect peer
aggression often terminate their relations with the perpetrators. This study is
based on the social learning and learning theory approach. In this case
adolescence is treated in a special period of changes in social functioning.
Objective: The study presents specific determinants of indirect type of
perpetrator and victim behaviour in adolescence. The study analyses the
following determinants: aggressiveness, attachment and temperament. Method: The
respondents’ behaviour was measured with the self – assessment questionnaires:
Mini DIA (Österman The Mini Inventory of Direct and Indirect Aggression, 2010),
IPPA (Armsden, Greenberg Attachment scale, 1987), EAS (Buss, Plomin Temperament
scale, 1997) and BPAQ (Buss, Perry Aggression Questionnaire, 1992). The sample
consisted of 160 secondary school students aged between 16 and 19. There were 82
girls (60%) and 78 boys (40%) in the studied population. The study was conducted
in groups during a one-hour session. Results: The research results indicated the
significance of the nature of attachment (mother alienation) for the undertaken
risky behaviour of both perpetrator-type and victim-type. The differences relate
to the type of relationship with parents (secure or insecure pattern), own
experience of being in the role of victim or perpetrator, and the level of
hostility. A separate model of determining factors for indirect type of
aggressive behaviour was also demonstrated. Conclusion: In the light of the
presented results, the proper diagnostic process seems important in order to
differentiate between the assumed roles (aggressor/victim) and to apply suitable
measures. In the case of indirect-type aggressors, the focus should be on coping
with hostility, self-control and emotional control skills and working on
alternative ways of functioning in the family (particularly in the relationship
with mother).
