Title: Relationship between attitudes, beliefs, feelings of violence in Tamil films and violent behaviour among Indian teenagers
Authors: Munusamy, Kalaivani
ID: openalex.W2964286772
URL: 

Television contains a wealth of movie genres that can be one of the potential
contributors to the growth of violent behavior among teenagers. Violent film is
one of the issues that is gaining wide attention from the electronic media.
Thus, violence in films is one of the specific learning conditions believed to
be a potential contributor towards the growth of violent behaviour among
teenagers. According to Natesan (2012), Tamil films on television are prime
examples that promote and spread gangsterism among the Indians. From previous
research, violent behaviour problems among teenagers and the effect of viewing
violence in media have already existed in Malaysia. This leads to high crime
rate among Indian teenagers. The general objective of this study is to examine
the relationship between viewing violent scenes in Tamil films on television
towards the behaviours of Indian teenagers. Apart from that, it specifically
focuses on the pattern of watching films on television among Indian teenagers,
the relationship between attitudes of viewing violent scenes in Tamil films and
the behaviours of Indian teenagers, the relationship between beliefs in viewing
violent scenes in Tamil films and the behaviours of Indian teenagers; and also
the relationship between feelings of viewing violent scenes in Tamil films and
the behaviour of Indian teenagers. A quantitative method was used in this study.
Two sampling methods were employed in this study. The sample of this study
consisted of 400 teenagers from a total population of 133, 767 Indian teenagers
in Selangor. The sampling methods were convenient sampling and purposive
sampling. This location was selected for the study because data showed that the
state has the highest crime rates. The study was designed based on the
Cultivation Theory.The data was analysed using Statistical Package for Social
Sciences (SPSS) version 22.0. Descriptive statistic and inferential statistic
were used in this study. Descriptive statistic was used to identify percentage
values, mean, average and standard deviation. While inferential statistic was
used to explain the relationships that contribute to the variables of the study.
Teenagers who involved in this study spent a considerable amount of time to
watch television and specially watch Tamil films on television in a week more
than 13 times. Thus, almost more than half of respondents spent more than three
hour to watch Tamil films in a day and like to watch films on television on
Sunday. The correlation result showed that there is a strong relationship
between attitudes of watching violent scenes in Tamil films and Indian
teenagers’ behaviour (0.832), beliefs of watching violent scenes in Tamil films
and Indian teenagers’ behaviour (0.908) and feelings of watching violent scenes
in Tamil films and Indian teenagers’ behaviour (0.939). The correlation was
significant at 1% level of significance. The results revealed that teenagers
give positive reactions towards violence in Tamil films on attitudes; beliefs
and feelings that enhance their changes of violent behaviours. In today’s world,
exposure to violence is essentially unavoidable. Teenagers tend to be affected
negatively from the violence in films and follow sensational stories created by
the media for profit purpose. Therefore, it is very important for the film
censorship board to filter out violent scenes in Tamil films before telecasting
them in the television. This is because there is lack of awareness on the
violent messages that are steadily instilled in young viewers’ minds, and the
moral values that defied their development.
