Title: Predictors of Teacher Support: Turkey and Shanghai in the Programme for International Student Assessment, 2012
Authors: Gülendam Akgül, Gökçe Çokamay, Ergül Demir
ID: openalex.W2343032976
URL: https://doi.org/10.14689/ejer.2016.63.7

Problem Statement: Although teacher support is important for many student
outcomes, including academic achievement, attendance, wellbeing, and dropout,
related factors remain unexamined. The Purpose of the Study: The aim of this
study was to investigate predictors of perceived teacher support of 15-year-old
students who participated in the 2012 Programme for International Student
Assessment in either Turkey or Shanghai. Method: In this basic research,
secondary analyses were performed with PISA 2012 data, and multiple linear
regression analyses were used to predict the variables that affect teacher
support as perceived by students. Findings: Results show that a sense of
belonging at school, instrumental motivation for mathematics, mathematics self-
efficacy, and attitudes toward school in terms of learning outcomes and learning
activities are predictors of teacher support in Turkey. In Shanghai, teacher
support was predicted by a different set of variables, including mathematics
teacher’s classroom management, teacher behavior in terms of student
orientation, interest in mathematics, attitude toward school in terms of
learning outcomes, mathematics self-efficacy, and educational resources at
home.  In Turkey, the five affective variables explained only 13% of the
variance, whereas in Shanghai, the six affective variables explained 24% of the
variance. Conclusion and Recommendations: In models of teacher support, Turkey
and Shanghai differ, particularly in terms of total prediction levels, as the
model constructed for Shanghai was more predictive than that for Turkey. The
most predictive variable in Shanghai was teacher classroom management and, in
Turkey, sense of belonging at school. Similarities did emerge, however;
mathematics self-efficacy and attitudes toward school in terms of learning
outcomes were predictors of teacher support in both countries. Since teacher
support is important to students’ personal development, academic achievement,
and well-being, the results can support the execution of educational activities
in schools and the investigation of ways to increase such support. Keywords:
Predictors, multiple linear regression, teacher characteristics, affective
characteristics
