Title: Researching children as becoming writers in their first year of school
Authors: K. Smith
ID: openalex.W2526876145
URL: 

Young children’s writing activity in English Reception classrooms is framed by a
rigid developmental model whereby children are conceived of as ‘becoming’
writers. However, recent postSstructuralist research suggests that writing
activity, as an assemblage of objects, bodies, expressions and territories,
involves constant change rather than being fixed to particular
frameworks.&#13;\n&#13;\nThis ethnographic enquiry focussed on six children in
one Reception class during one school year. Deleuzoguattarian ideas were
‘plugged into’ a sociocultural, multimodal understanding of young children’s
writing and the children were reSconceptualised as ‘becoming’: creating and
disrupting multiple connections and relations through their actions as writers
and research participants. Narrative observations, field notes, photographs,
video and artefacts were analysed rhizomatically and vignettes of data were
formed into discursive assemblages.&#13;\n&#13;\nThe findings indicate that
children’s writing within openSended play in the classroom was a moving,
overlapping and connective ensemble, utilising many different modes of
expression (drawing, text making, map making, copying, etc.). The writing
materials used in these encounters ‘mattered’ to children: their sensorial
qualities, the histories associated with them, and the potential they had to be
adapted. Writing activity, however, was often organised by adults into regular
discreet phonics sessions where the children’s opportunities for material
intraSaction, social interaction and links to other writing experiences, were
limited. Alongside this, discourses surrounding writing in the classroom were
reflective of the curriculum ‘ideal’, and certain modes of expression were
privileged.&#13;\n&#13;\nThe conclusions suggest that containing young
children’s writing within representative acts driven by external outcomes limits
the potential of writing to be a sensory, embodied, material, and connected
activity. Adults in schools should foster children’s playful writing encounters
where these elements exist. Effective practices are needed to encourage young
children’s multiple modes of expression, enabling them to build the language
associations needed for their writing to be meaningful and desirous.
