Title: A Case Study of Arts Integration Practices in Developing the 21st Century Skills of Critical Thinking, Creativity, Communication, and Collaboration
Authors: Cari A. Maneen
ID: openalex.W2545726467
URL: https://digitalcommons.gardner-webb.edu/education_etd/182

This qualitative, single case study explored teacher perceptions of arts
integration practices in developing critical thinking, creativity,
communication, and collaboration (4 C’s) at a North Carolina A+ (arts-
integrated) kindergarten through eighth grade charter school. A combination of
interviews, document analysis, and site observations were utilized to answer the
guiding question: What is the impact of a school-wide arts integration program
on creativity, critical thinking, collaboration, and communication? The research
focused on three questions: (RQ1) What strategies/methods are used to implement
a school-wide arts integration program at this school? (RQ2) What
strategies/methods are used to foster student acquisition of the 4 C’s through
arts integration at this school? (RQ3) What 21st century support systems align
with the school-wide arts integration program at this school? Data gathered from
interviews, observations, and documents revealed common themes or practices
implemented at the school to sustain the school-wide arts integration program:
collaborative planning, leadership support, focus on the process of learning
rather than the product, multiple learning pathways and measures of success,
professional development, community partnerships and relationships, and
reflection as a tool for growth. The arts integration strategies perceived by
participants at the research site that promote the 4 C’s include student
engagement in group projects, student self- and peer- analysis of artistic work,
student creative choice, and student expression of knowledge through multiple
art forms and mediums. The 21st century support systems of standards,
assessments, curriculum and instruction, professional development, and learning
environments were found to be in alignment with the arts integration support
systems at the school site. The results of this study led the researcher to
conclude the school-wide practices of arts integration promote student
acquisition of the 4 C’s. Recommendations include providing education
preparation programs with redesigned curriculum offerings to emphasize the
connection between the arts and 21st century skills, such as the 4 C’s. Adapting
the school infrastructure to support collaborative planning, teaching, and
professional development in arts integration practices that support the 4 C’s
should also be considered.
