Title: NMR pioneers reflect on Silicon Valley: a conversation with Martin Packard and Weston Anderson
Authors: Kristin Douty
ID: openalex.W2464540198
URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/mrc.4461

Packard was born in 1921 and raised in the town of Corvallis, Oregon, where his
father worked as a paleontologist at the local Oregon State University. It was
through his father's workplace that Packard says he felt naturally connected to
the scientific community. Although he originally foresaw a future as an
archaeologist traipsing through foreign lands, his discovery of a microbiology
textbook as a young boy ultimately shifted his course to the hard sciences.
Packard was comfortable with his newfound path, describing a career in science
as: “just something I wanted to do, so I did it.” One of Packard's first
encounters with technology was building crystal radios at the age of 10 years
old. The family RCA radio also served as a platform of inspiration with its
large four-vacuum tubes and phonograph. Reminiscing on the radios of that time,
he says: “In those days, we didn't have all the fancy diodes. We had a galena
and what was called a cat's whisker, so you move it around until you had a diode
and then you could hear it.” His fascination led to a job at a local radio shop
fixing radios, finding bad capacitors, and installing car radios while he was
still in high school. Beyond radios, Packard cites Popular Science Magazine as a
widespread educational resource for science enthusiasts in the early to mid-20th
century. But Popular Science was particularly significant then for its
educational approach. It taught young readers to understand the ways that
individual parts contribute to an entire invention. Compared with past
mainstream technology resources like Popular Science, Packard says that schools
these days tend to: “teach kids to program, and that's the central thesis… not
to teach them how the computer works or how an LED works, or how does anything
work, but can I program them to do something. So, times are different.” Packard
stayed in Corvallis after graduating from high school and continued his
education at Oregon State University. He completed a bachelor's degree in
physics in 1942. When reflecting on his time at Oregon State, Packard joked that
he was not necessarily a straight-A student; he confesses to earning a “B” in
sociology and psychology. Shortly after graduation, he and four other students
were selected to work at Westinghouse Research in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. The
main goal of his assigned research group was to develop a transmit–receive box
that became fundamental to airborne radar. The learning environment at
Westinghouse forced Packard, in his words, to “keep peeling the layer off the
onion” of whatever technical problem he encountered without seeking assistance
from superiors. One particular experience of this sort occurred while tuning a
magnetron. When he sought advice from fellow researcher Daniel Alpert, he was
curtly instructed to “figure it out!” Straightforward, do-it-yourself replies to
enquiries were typical at Westinghouse, but Packard did not mind. He compared
the working atmosphere with a doctoral program in the sense that researchers
could investigate problems while taking free, extracurricular mathematics
courses. The notes of microwave expert and physicist William Hansen – who
calculated the radio fields that were necessary to assist with the Varian
brothers' development of the Klystron – were the basis of Westinghouse's
extracurricular educational opportunities. As Packard said: “It was an ideal
environment for somebody just coming out of a normal undergraduate education.
Now, I doubt if that happens anymore.” Anderson was born in 1928 in the small
town of Kingsburg, California. He says that his mother observed his uncanny
inclination for lights and plugs while he was still a crawling infant. While
growing up in the California countryside, he fondly recalls the local telephone
worker who provided the half-charged batteries with which he built small
circuits. Anderson also cites an uncle, who was also a radio amateur and
technical enthusiast, as an early source of scientific inspiration. The
encouragement fueled his fascination and led him to pursue a HAMM radio amateur
license (W6API) while still a high school student. Eventually, his interests led
to a radio repair job in the nearby town of Selma. Rather than talking with
other HAMM enthusiasts on his radio, as many people do, Anderson enjoyed
building beam antennas. These devices could beam radio waves in certain
directions depending on how they were turned. He notes: “This was high frequency
in those days, two meters, forty-four megahertz. I used to see how far I could
go… I was mostly interested in how the beam pattern changed.” Anderson's natural
aptitude for science expanded in high school with the guidance of a Stanford
University alumnus as well as a chemistry and physics teacher, Gilbert Ewan.
Anderson described the teacher's impressive ability to make science more
interesting for young students – a feat that is often difficult to achieve as a
high school teacher working with restless teenagers. Ewan encouraged a young
Anderson to pursue a career in science and to apply to Stanford University.
After spending 2 years at Reedley College, Anderson followed Ewan's advice and
applied. He transferred to the prestigious university and completed his
bachelor's degree 3 years later. Following the completion of his first year of
graduate school at Stanford, Anderson travelled to Pittsburgh in order to work
at Westinghouse in the summer of 1951. The main research endeavor in his group
was to study mercury atoms that were used in lights and lamps at that time. The
following summer, he worked for Varian Associates at its original headquarters
in San Carlos to conduct research on magnetic resonance. One of his main
projects was to work on probes for flux meters. Varian had begun to research
magnetic resonance shortly after making improvements in flux meters to measure
magnetic fields. Anderson returned for his third year of graduate school at
Stanford after working for Varian. Upon his return, Bloch instructed him and a
fellow graduate student, James Arnold, to develop a new spectrometer with
greater resolution and sensitivity. While Arnold was responsible for making a
magnet with improved homogeneity, Anderson was assigned the task of making the
radio frequency and switching equipment. His first task, he says, was really to
deal with the entire electronic system to ultimately make the instrument more
sensitive for resolving spectra. Afterward, he tested chemicals with the
spectrometer and analyzed the results using quantum mechanics. The project
eventually became Anderson's thesis in 1954, entitled, Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance of Some Hydrocarbons. It was not until many years later, he says, that
he learned: “… the molecules weren't hydrocarbons in the strict sense of the
word. Us physicists, including Bloch, didn't know that.” Although both Anderson
and Packard describe a natural inclination for the sciences, their affinities
were predominantly nurtured through exposure to radios. Packard describes the
progression from radios to later inventions as a straightforward path because
their interests: “made it very simple to do the NMR… that required magnets and
radio frequency and receivers, so the whole thing was quite normal.” The
momentous events that transpired at Stanford, however, were anything but
“normal”. Several years before Packard and Anderson's matriculation at Stanford,
researcher Felix Bloch worked at a laboratory in Boston where he designed skins
for stealth bombers during World War II. His designs were unsuccessful and led
him to pursue a new project, but he was not quite sure where to begin. According
to Packard's story – which he heard from a friend – Bloch experienced a rush of
inspiration in the middle of an orchestra concert in Boston, when he realized
the need to explore spin and magnetic moments not only with a molecular beam but
also with samples of normal density. He began to hatch a plan to revisit the
work of Israel Isaac Rabi, the Nobel Laureate who had worked on deuterium in a
molecular beam. Meanwhile, Anderson was an undergraduate student at Stanford at
the same time that Packard had finished college and joined the Manhattan Project
at the University of California at Berkeley. A recommendation from Daniel Alpert
at Westinghouse led Bloch to secure Packard as a researcher. Bloch had
previously worked on the moment of the neutron with Nobel Laureate Luis Walter
Alvarez at Berkeley, but he decided to explore the concept of nuclear induction.
Regarding their first meeting, Packard says: “(Bloch) wanted to see if I knew
anything. I remember he asked if I knew why the Earth had two global tides
everyday when the moon only went around once. I didn't know the answer to that,
but it didn't matter… half an hour later I was a graduate student at Stanford.”
Packard's rapid assimilation under Bloch's wing was a remarkable event that
would be considered abnormal when compared with the preparation time for
present-day academic projects, yet he described the smooth transition to
Stanford as commonplace in the mid-20th century. Neither paperwork nor
references were required for him to become a graduate student at a research
behemoth, a fact that astonishes him now since, as he recalls: “Nobody bothered
to look up to see that I had an undergraduate degree.” Bloch went to work to
assemble a research team. The first person to join was William Hansen, with whom
he had partnered to work on specific aspects of the project, followed by a swift
recruiting of Packard. Hansen was primarily responsible for building what the
group called the probe and its driving coil with the intention of securing a
“sweep” for the signal that they anticipated would reach a width of 10 to 20
Gauss. The apparatus was designed in a way that ensured a high-frequency power
to stimulate protons. After observing some compatibility issues with a microvolt
signal, Hansen rearranged the transmitter and receiver coils orthogonally so
that the spins could process around the magnetic field. Packard busily worked on
the third portion of the apparatus that included the radio frequency voltage
source and the display. He also brought an oscilloscope that he had used at
Westinghouse; the device was a fundamental instrument at the time for displaying
traces. The group was ready to perform their initial experiment in a cyclotron
laboratory at Stanford shortly before Christmas in 1945. The cyclotron provided
a power supply for the little magnet that allowed the group to adjust the
magnetic field. Bloch conceived that the long relaxation time required the
sample to be placed in the fringing field of the magnet, which would be a few
hundred or thousand Gauss. Bloch expected that the sample would be in the
fringing field continuously for a day so that the spins would eventually
polarize at the magnetic moment. Packard explained: “The idea was to take it and
move it over to here and fiddle with the magnetic field, and then we were
supposed to see a signal.” Hansen's design functioned quite effectively as a
microphone for its ability to record acoustic noise, but it failed to register
any NMR signal. Regarding the failed first experiment, Packard described: “… all
we saw was nothing but noise.” Hansen returned to the drawing board in order to
reconfigure the probe so that it was less sensitive to motion and more rigid.
The group took a brief break with the intention to regroup within a few weeks.
Packard and his wife, Barbara, left for his hometown of Corvallis to visit his
parents for the first time since the beginning of the war. After the holidays,
Packard rejoined the researchers, ready for a second attempt to record a signal.
The group tended to work late into the night at Stanford in order to avoid
electric and acoustic interference. For their second attempt, Packard says: “We
were all set, everything all tuned up. What did we see? Nothing. Absolutely
nothing.” The third attempt led the group to readjust the magnetic field by
removing the cyclotron magnet in a way so that it could sweep through the
magnetic field. This adjustment did not initially help the experiment. Hansen
and Bloch walked to another part of the laboratory to fiddle with the magnet
control, while Packard continued to watch for a signal without any expectations.
“Then, all of a sudden, what I saw was a Packard He describes the first signal
as a that went up and then and went was a for acoustic interference. The was
what Bloch called a rapid in a quantum Packard described: was was that the were
and the relaxation time was very so it could as a here we were of off on
relaxation time, and of off on But it Packard recalls that the group anticipated
a they were not the of the magnetic field. Bloch's did not take into the of
molecules in Rather than a that to a magnetic field, his a that is in Packard as
to what would have had he not for the first signal. The could have quite he
says, because the at Stanford from the at where working under placed more on
quantum and aspects like relaxation Bloch had that using physics would work for
a quantum system because of the But Bloch did not well when he that the was to
his at it out that are Packard “In many was a very to work but in many He had an
that was as as The graduate students working under Bloch did not with him at all
during the while he worked at a Regarding the of Packard says: “We just knew
what we were 1954, on the night that Anderson was a graduate student, Bloch that
he an to become the first of for Nuclear Research in One problem was that of his
graduate students had nor completed their doctoral Bloch asked Anderson and
fellow graduate student, James Arnold, to their within a 2 time in order to his
move to Anderson's Nuclear Magnetic Resonance of Some was within that of time.
But he is not the since, he says: that it really to have a after I thesis in and
he an he said: you to and we can up some and do some magnetic is not an that any
could Although the Stanford research group to with the of their Bloch's new was
more and than he had Anderson recalls Bloch's for his new he says: was nothing
than as far as Bloch was he but he The new doctoral degree their time at up a
magnet, some and but Bloch had had by the of the first year of his He had the
entire year and for scientific equipment. Anderson Bloch's to for another year
when the said: had I take of this to Stanford.” Although Packard was working at
Varian Associates in California the early he that the of Bloch as the first of
was an for a physicist who research and development as to the of an Bloch and
Anderson returned to California in of new Anderson a at Varian Associates and
went to work on an he became more in other projects at the like and and he many
on those included for and his idea of Varian Associates NMR research using a
that was by a and of the Varian a of a sample by a magnetic field and removing
it The magnet the or which then the magnetic field of the The NMR and chemistry
began with Varian Associates researcher and microwave James Packard cites as the
who brought NMR to the because he says: “We were not so we didn't really know
anything what you could do with it was coming in as a that built on the simple
which then led to the of NMR to the of NMR and chemistry was the of the that
Packard says was the but just a of to the need to make magnetic resonance more
for and their of large Varian was to and Anderson had the ideal to this He
designed magnetic in those and placed them on the magnet in order to of he an
idea to on Rather than through individual Anderson the to the of the to all the
at once. Anderson's with and resolution eventually in his the of with this he
says: second be into hundred and then the experiment as many times as you to and
then the Anderson's student, the computer apparatus using the for to and the
went on to the Nobel in for his to the development of the high resolution
nuclear magnetic resonance in Packard cites technology and a of the age as the
for Varian early with the workplace Packard “… occurred from and and William
Hansen and they didn't from the that this is what we were to The was to people
and to them in a then they would do that were We did a of that were but they
were Some of them worked and some But often as do, Varian Associates encountered
many its Some of the early was when Felix Bloch, who the research and
development was without during a A doctoral student of Bloch was responsible for
the The was that the Nobel would to any of his students by the same Packard was
the other the way it have “… to out why I was asked to the after and and a and
more than to the I could that out other than that I had to do Anderson this as
the first time that he his then The second that Varian was in a of was that
Anderson over the course of a While working in research in he was assigned the
task of building NMR probe coils that were more sensitive to in with a local
called Varian and compared their research in and tested them to see if they
Eventually, Varian decided that they were with coils and wanted to more from
when the of the Varian NMR to coils from but the was a Anderson wanted to them
the coils or them the coils for to nothing.” The when to make any to with
Anderson says because “… he just He they had a of was his and Varian had then
for an to make the which the that they could make for Varian – they ultimately
failed to a coil sample to make Eventually, Anderson says that the yet the still
required from Varian long to any other These 10 and by that time, Anderson had a
new source for but Varian would need to their which would more When in and the
technology to coils and Varian began a of the into Varian still had the but was
left to The story of Varian is remarkable because of its as the first to move
into Varian the that scientific in the yet many people in the research have left
their and would a so its Packard also asked this but he eventually the Regarding
the and of he the became that to in an it is a or it the the you do not to that,
or then you not many have not in as a of their to within the of scientific He
“We have that have not We have that the The little could the like but not the
So, what I is that when a how to or it does not Packard's as a for other who
still have a to from if the of is to as a of the same time in their both Packard
and Anderson in academic Packard that this is a natural course of events in a
and that the be to the This researcher and student is a of a simple in he says:
“… the ability of all to on the of the young Research at the university also the
of with young students who have he “… the part is the people that are to have
and explore and that both of is because a new in When Anderson was to the of
Research at he worked on his to He eventually took a new with Meanwhile, Packard
in and took up his in their in the was the of move research in large Packard and
his goal was the of research with the of in order to the Several years have
since the of Varian and research are a of Packard or The researchers are their
the of his in and Anderson not far from his scientific He for years at the of in
where he to and The students with simple projects that become more over a of the
first meeting, he students aspects of technology and its The second is a where
Anderson in devices for students to work as a that he designed using a magnet on
the of a The of this he says, is for students to a coil up to a and which are
then to a so that when the the the to which in the Anderson's are to students
both young and through a learning He sure that his by that's the of not learning
by out of a hear it and then they have to see how it But his to in science for
future do not with his as a Anderson and his wife, have with a to their
scientific at a the was to for all future Anderson the in of his first academic
Gilbert the high school science teacher who to an scientific through the work of
his from his to Packard time with his family and up to on events and the
however, he and his wife, Barbara, a for learning other and foreign is a to
their of where can be from within the in Packard's its which is why he and
worked for over years to secure a which was in late The is Packard and not just
to science but also a to their where their and are – for a certain from the to
explore when he When they are not working on or spending time with their Packard
and Anderson still Stanford they The in this are the and the and do not the of
Magnetic Resonance in or the
