Title: “It Don’t Mean a Thing if It Ain’t Got that Swing”– an Alternative Concept for Understanding the Evolution of Dance and Music in Human Beings
Authors: Joachim Richter, Roya Ostovar
ID: openalex.W2527744052
URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2016.00485

The functions of dance and music in human evolution are a mystery. Current
research on the evolution of music has mainly focused on its melodic attribute
which would have evolved alongside (proto-)language. Instead, we propose an
alternative conceptual framework which focuses on the co-evolution of rhythm and
dance (R&D) as intertwined aspects of a multimodal phenomenon characterized by
the unity of action and perception. Reviewing the current literature from this
viewpoint we propose the hypothesis that R&D have co-evolved long before other
musical attributes and (proto-)language. Our view is supported by increasing
experimental evidence particularly in infants and children: beat is perceived
and anticipated already by newborns and rhythm perception depends on body
movement. Infants and toddlers spontaneously move to a rhythm irrespective of
their cultural background. The impulse to dance may have been prepared by the
susceptibility of infants to be soothed by rocking. Conceivable evolutionary
functions of R&D include sexual attraction and transmission of mating signals.
Social functions include bonding, synchronization of many individuals,
appeasement of hostile individuals, and pre- and extra-verbal communication
enabling embodied individual and collective memorizing. In many cultures R&D are
used for entering trance, a base for shamanism and early religions. Individual
benefits of R&D include improvement of body coordination, as well as
painkilling, anti-depressive, and anti-boredom effects. Rhythm most likely paved
the way for human speech as supported by studies confirming the overlaps between
cognitive and neural resources recruited for language and rhythm. In addition,
dance encompasses visual and gestural communication. In future studies attention
should be paid to which attribute of music is focused on and that the close
mutual relation between R&D is taken into account. The possible evolutionary
functions of dance deserve more attention.
