Title: Sense of belonging for students with intensive special education needs : An exploration of students' belonging and teachers' role in implementing support
Authors: Henri Pesonen
ID: openalex.W2264980068
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10138/159852

Sense of belonging has been defined as the degree to which an individual feels
included, accepted, and supported by others in a variety of social settings, for
example, a school context. Previous research on sense of belonging has mainly
focused on students with special needs in inclusive schools. There appears to be
a shortage of research on sense of belonging in different school placements
(general and special) and in post-school life for individuals with intensive
special education needs. &#13;\n&#13;\nThe purpose of this thesis, which
consists of three related, internationally published peer-reviewed articles
(Studies I-III), was to examine to what extent sense of belonging can be
supported in school and in post-school life for students with intensive special
education needs in Finland. Particular focus was placed on the voices of those
students in order to understand how best to create a positive school climate
that supports sense of belonging for all. Teacher perceptions of the implemented
three-tiered support model (Finland' s Basic Education Act 642/2010) and school
visit data were utilized to contextualize the students conceptions and
experiences. &#13;\n&#13;\nStudy I examined conceptions associated with sense of
belonging in general and special school placements for middle-school students
with intensive special education needs (N = 5). Phenomenographic methods of
analysis were utilized in Study I. In Study II, which was based on the
narratives of two females (ages 26 and 29) with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD),
the focus was on sense of belonging and various life transition issues that may
appear in childhood, adolescence, and adulthood in the absence of appropriate
social supports. Qualitative narrative approaches were used in Study II to
analyze interview and document data in order to create life transition stories.
Study III examined the implementation of new, special education legislation in
Finland (Basic Education Act 642/2010) among students with intensive special
education needs. The material for Study III consisted of (1) survey data on
teacher perceptions (N = 526) of the implementation of the education legislation
and the current organization of special education services, and (2) observations
of the implementation of the legislation in schools (N = 12) across Finland. The
analysis of the survey data in Study III was based on sequential mixed-methods
design. The school observation data were analyzed qualitatively.
&#13;\n&#13;\nIn Study I, the qualitative phenomenographic analyses of interview
transcripts revealed various conceptions regarding the students sense of
belonging in different school placements (general and special). The students had
undergone numerous placements in which their sense of belonging had been
jeopardized, as disturbing relationships with teachers and peers seemed to have
affected the students mental and physical well-being, resulting in disturbing
behaviors in their earlier educational settings. Despite the various placements,
the students felt better in their current, special, school, which had a positive
climate. The results of Study II demonstrated that lack of social support
increases the number of school placements and transitions and causes biases in
forming a sense of belonging. The findings further suggested that providing
social assistance and positive life experiences during emerging adulthood (ages
18-25) seems to matter most in forming a strong sense of belonging in life.
Furthermore, the findings of both Studies I and II suggested that, for
individuals with intensive special education needs, adapting one s behavior in
order to feel a sense of belonging (Juvonen, 2006) might be associated with
hiding the unique characteristics of a person s special needs. Study III found
that teachers values and beliefs seem to influence the organization of special
education (e.g., affecting the overall school climate). Furthermore, some
schools and teachers implemented the law s integration requirement by placing
all students with intensive special needs in separate units or school buildings,
whereas other schools placed students in general education. &#13;\n&#13;\nThe
findings suggest that students with intensive special education needs can feel a
sense of belonging primarily in schools in which adults work in
multidisciplinary collaboration, which helps to create an accepting and
supportive school climate. In the post-school phase, it appeared that positive
experiences during emerging adulthood (between the ages of 18 and 25) seem to
matter most in generating a strong sense of belonging to a community. Hence,
individuals with intensive special needs would benefit from ongoing support from
the time they first enter school with continuation through the post-school
transition phase and into adulthood. Also, the results hypothetically imply that
the school principal plays a significant role in creating a school climate that
supports a sense of belonging for all students. The results of this thesis also
shed light on several limitations that prevent generalizations from being made.
Therefore, further study is unquestionably needed. This thesis has provided an
initial exploration into the under-researched area of sense of belonging in
different school placements and in post-school life for students with intensive
special education needs. &#13;\n&#13;\n Keywords: sense of belonging, intensive
special education needs, school placement, transition, teachers values and
beliefs, school climate
