Title: Lagged Effect of Parental Warmth on Child-to-Parent Violence through Moral Disengagement Strategies
Authors: Nazaret Bautista-Aranda, Lourdes Contreras, M. Carmen Cano‐Lozano
ID: openalex.W4396888841
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/children11050585

Empirical evidence supports the simultaneous relationship between parental
warmth and child-to-parent violence (CPV). However, no studies analyze the
lagged effects of perceived parental warmth and the potential impact of
cognitive mechanisms legitimizing immoral behavior on this relationship. This
study aimed to examine the mediating role of moral disengagement strategies
(reconstruction of immoral behavior, obscuring personal responsibility,
misrepresenting injurious consequences, and blaming the victim) in the
relationship between the perceived paternal and maternal warmth dimensions
(warmth-communication and criticism-rejection) during childhood and CPV towards
the father and mother. The sample included 2122 Spanish adolescents (57.7%
female) aged 13 to 18 years. The Child-to-Parent Violence Questionnaire (CPV-Q),
the Mechanisms of Moral Disengagement Scale (MMDS-S), and the Warmth Scale were
used as assessment instruments. The results indicate that paternal and maternal
warmth-communication is negatively associated with CPV, whereas paternal and
maternal criticism-rejection and moral disengagement strategies are positively
related to CPV. The mediation models show that the reconstruction of immoral
behavior plays a crucial mediation role in the relationship between paternal and
maternal warmth-communication and CPV as well as in the relationship between
maternal criticism-rejection and CPV. The results emphasize the necessity of
early prevention programs for parents promoting positive parenting practices,
including parental warmth, to foster children's adaptive socio-cognitive
development. In addition, addressing moral disengagement in adolescents could
help prevent or stop a pattern of violent behavior toward parents.
