Title: Clinician and lived experience perspectives on non‐judgemental family care, in working with childhood maltreatment and intergenerational trauma: A pilot narrative review
Authors: Ashley Twigger, Amos Yong Soon Lee, Jackie Amos
ID: openalex.W4405947621
URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/anzf.1611

Abstract Non‐judgemental care is a widely acknowledged aspect of therapeutic
work with children and families. There is limited literature that defines
current practices of non‐judgemental family care and assesses its implementation
within mental health settings. Clinicians who encounter and work with childhood
maltreatment and abuse may make moral judgements and potentially ascribe
culpability to a child's parents, carers or support network. This is despite
understanding that adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) are associated with the
complex interplay of sociocultural factors and wider determinants of health.
This pilot narrative review explores facilitators and barriers to provision of
non‐judgemental care in the modern literature from clinician, as well as lived
and survivor, perspectives. A detailed search of the literature was conducted
using PubMed, Cochrane Library, Ovid, Embase and PsycINFO databases, with focus
on childhood maltreatment, intergenerational trauma and ACEs between 2014 and
2024 and published in English language. Title and abstract screening, then
full‐text screening, was completed by the primary author and results were
identified via informal analysis of themes. Eight studies of clinician
perspectives identified facilitating themes of professionals' responsiveness,
positive personal attributes and utilisation of strength‐based approaches.
Clinician‐identified challenges included maintaining curiosity in the context of
uncertainty and complexity, power differences and unconscious processes. Nine
lived experience studies were included, identifying listening and attunement as
facilitators. Shame, barriers and inadequate acknowledgement of historical
traumas hindered therapeutic engagement. Shame was found to be a key barrier to
the experience of non‐judgemental care and postulated to influence how clinician
interventions are received. The author concludes that non‐judgemental care is
incompletely understood in practice, with clinician judgements being ubiquitous
and diffuse in therapeutic impacts. Future research is required to understand
intersubjective therapeutic perspectives and elucidate existent gaps between
delivery and perception of non‐judgemental care.
