Title: Heroine’s Learning Journey: Motivating Women in STEM Online Courses Through the Power of a Narrative
Authors: Luis Felipe Coimbra Costa, Samuel Gomes, Ana Moura Santos, Geraldo Xexéo, Yuri Lima
ID: openalex.W4391341410
URL: https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2024.3360376

Although Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) are essential
for the development of society, men hugely outnumber women in the majority of
STEM fields in higher education, a factor that hinders inclusion and restricts
the possibility of having different points-of-view. Previous studies indicate
multiple causes of low female motivation in STEM degrees and careers, which
inspired several initiatives to increase female interest in STEM. A proven way
to captivate an audience to change its attitude is the heroic narrative model, a
style of narrative in which a character goes through a sequence of difficulty-
increasing and attitude-shaping quests. This paper proposes a heroic narrative
model named Heroine’s Learning Journey (HLJ) targeted at counteracting low
female participation in STEM courses. In particular, the HLJ model is developed
especially for enhancing STEM online courses, by using a narrative that can
encourage female students to engage and prevail in them. The HLJ model is
divided into three acts, each composed of several stages symbolizing steps
tailored to a female student’s development. The model was applied to set up the
structure of a preexisting Machine Learning online course with hundreds of
enrolled students. Although a first version of the course already presented a
higher-than-expected female enrollment <italic
xmlns:mml="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"
xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">per se</i> (≈ 37.3%), with HLJ, we
verified an even higher female enrollment (≈ 59.2%), slightly surpassing male
enrollments. The feedback provided in learners’ responses to a final, voluntary
and anonymous questionnaire, allowed to obtain the degree of satisfaction of
participants at the end of the course with the HLJ. The responses indicated
that, at the end of the second edition of the online course, students were able
to acknowledge the existence of a STEM gender imbalance, and appreciated the
motivating nature of the HLJ model. From several student’s feedback and comments
submitted in the questionnaire, one can conclude that the attitude-shaping
character of the HLJ was greatly appreciated, in addition to the technical
content of the course. All these preliminary results are indicative of the
usability of HLJ to foster gender balance in STEM online courses. Thus, the
present study contributes to STEM Education by leveraging the motivation of
young women to enter and prevail in these areas of study.
