Title: The New Direction of Indonesian Character Education: Bullying, Moral Decadence, and Juvenile Delinquency
Authors: AB. Musyafa Fathoni, Mubaidi Sulaeman, Elima Amiroh Nur Azizah, Yuslia Styawati, Mahendra Utama Cahya Ramadhan
ID: openalex.W4401612789
URL: https://doi.org/10.14421/jpai.v21i1.7759

Purpose – This article aims to provide a new direction for Character Education
in minimizing bullying and preventing moral decadence and delinquency in
adolescents in the school environment with a Prophetic Parenting approach.
Design/methods/approach – This research used a qualitative method of literature
type by collecting literature and data from books, scientific journal articles,
yellow books, and Indonesian laws and regulations to reconstruct Character
Education in Indonesia that has not been effective in responding to bullying,
moral decadency, and juvenile delinquency, using the Prophetic Parenting
approach. Findings – The first thing that the Prophet strongly emphasized in
Character Education was a prophetic character, which includes qualities such as
siddiq, amanah, tabligh, and fatimah. Second, in character building, following
the teachings of the Prophet Muhammad, is important to prioritize the language
of deeds rather than words alone. Third, the Prophet Muhammad’s approach taught
strong moral and ethical principles. Parents can refer to verses in the Qur'an
that emphasize the importance of behaving well, avoiding humility, and
humiliating others. Fourth, parents should encourage children to be open about
their experiences at school. Fifth, in overall efforts to overcome juvenile
delinquency, the Prophetic Parenting approach can be a guide in shaping the
character of adolescents with Islamic values and ethics. Research
implications/limitations – The research has theoretical implications that, to
minimize the occurrence of bullying, moral decency, and juvenile delinquency, it
is necessary to apply parenting that refers to the concept of the Prophet SAW in
building the character of Indonesian children toward a golden Indonesia in 2045.
Originality/value – The research provides direction for incorporating the
Prophetic Parenting approach into the Indonesian education curriculum in
Indonesia to build Character Education that involves the family environment.
