Title: Social Progress and the Dravidian “Race” in Tamil Social Thought
Authors: Collin Michael Sibley
ID: openalex.W4390588860
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/genealogy8010006

In the closing decades of the 19th century, a wide range of Tamil authors and
public speakers in colonial India became acutely interested in the notion of a
Dravidian “race”. This conception of a Dravidian race, rooted in European racial
and philological scholarship on the peoples of South India, became an important
symbol of Tamil cultural, religious, and social autonomy in colonial and post-
colonial Tamil thought, art, politics, and literature. European racial thought
depicted Dravidians as a savage race that had been subjugated or displaced by
the superior Aryan race in ancient Indic history. Using several key works of
colonial scholarship, non-Brahmin Tamil authors reversed and reconfigured this
idea to ground their own broad-reaching critiques of Brahmin political and
social dominance, Brahmanical Hinduism, and Indian nationalism. Whereas European
scholarship largely presented Dravidians as the inferiors of Aryans, non-Brahmin
Tamil thinkers argued that the ancient, Dravidian identity of the Tamil people
could stand alone without Aryan interference. This symbolic contrast between
Dravidian (Tamil, non-Brahmin, South Indian) and Aryan (Sanskritic, Brahmin,
North Indian) is a central component of 20th- and 21st-century Tamil public
discourse on caste, gender, and cultural autonomy. Tamil authors, speakers,
activists, and politicians used and continue to use the symbolic frame of
Dravidian racial history to advocate for many different political, cultural, and
social causes. While not all of these “Dravidian” discourses are meaningfully
politically or socially progressive, the long history of Dravidian-centered,
anti-Brahmanical discourse in Tamil South India has helped Tamil Nadu largely
rebuff the advances of Hindu nationalist politics, which have become dominant in
other cultural regions of present-day India. This piece presents a background on
the emergence of the term “Dravidian” in socially critical Tamil thought, as
well as its reversal and reconfiguration by Tamil social thinkers, orators, and
activists in the 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries. The piece begins with a brief
history of the terms “Dravidian” and “Aryan” in Western racial thought. The
piece then charts the evolution of this discourse in Tamil public thought by
discussing several important examples of Tamil social and political movements
that incorporate the conceptual poles of “Dravidian” and “Aryan” into their own
platforms.
