Title: The Vocational Ability, Vocational Motivation and Professional Identity of Xiamen University Teachers
Authors: Xi Huang, Lorna A. Espeso
ID: openalex.W4401973377
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.54097/3svpar20

With the rapid development of China's higher education, the quality of teachers
is becoming more and more important. On the one hand, the vocational ability of
college teachers directly affects the effectiveness of higher education; On the
other hand, the vocational motivation of college teachers determines the
efficiency of higher education. Therefore, whether from the perspective of
higher education development, reform, or university management, it is of great
theoretical significance and practical value to discuss the professional ability
and motivation of university teachers.A modern higher education system cannot be
separated from a stable and high-quality teaching team. In order to maintain the
stability of the team and continuously improve the professional quality, it is
necessary to cultivate the professional identity of college teachers.
Professional identity is the recognition degree of college teachers to higher
education. Only teachers with strong professional identity can devote themselves
to the cause of higher education. Only by systematically summarizing the current
situation of professional ability, professional motivation and professional
identity of college teachers can we draw the map of college teachers deeply. At
the same time, on the basis of the research data, the relationship between
professional ability, professional motivation and professional identity can be
deeply explored to explore the path to motivate the enthusiasm of college
teachers. According to the components of vocational ability, vocational
motivation and professional identity, interviews was utilized to determine the
educational background and academic background, teaching skills, diversified
teaching ability, project management ability, educational innovation ability,
communication ability with students and parents, personal ambition, working
environment, salary, social identity and career prospects. Salary satisfaction,
welfare security satisfaction, personal value realization, social recognition
and other dimensions, to deeply explore the professional characteristics of
Xiamen university teachers. Through narrative inquiry , the present status of
vocational ability ,vocational motivation and occupational identity was
explored, and the generation mechanism of occupational identity is sorted out.
Future directions of this study was presented as to exploring on other
methodology and increasing the locale and sample size.
