Title: Exploring Early Childhood Education Teachers' Play-Based Learning Pedagogical Practices in Zambia
Authors: Collins Kaluba, Bibian Kalinde, Robinson fMambwe, Noah Sichula, Naomi Njobvu
ID: openalex.W4392459161
URL: https://doi.org/10.53974/unza.jlss.5.4.1163

Although learning takes place throughout life, that which occurs during
childhood will never be equaled (UNICEF, 2018). Play is a legitimate right in
early childhood (Smith, 2013) and one of the most natural pathways to
exploration and learning (Saskatchewan, 2018). However, although play is a
legitimate right way of learning in Zambia (MOGE 2013), in practice its
implementation varies from school to school (Lungu, 2023). This study explored
the play-based pedagogies related to play-based learning of ECE teachers in
Zambia and their preparedness to use play as a teaching technique. The study
employed a concurrent or convergent parallel mixed-method design. A total of 30
ECE teachers across three districts of Zambia participated in this study. One-
to-one interviews were used to collect qualitative data, while structured
questionnaires were used to collect quantitative data for the study. Statistical
Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) version 25 was used to generate
descriptive statistics while qualitative data was analysed using content
analysis. The findings revealed that a considerable portion (83%) of ECE
teachers perceived their training as sufficient for teaching using play-based
pedagogies, but a notable minority expressed the need for more effective
training and support in this regard. Further, the findings revealed that PBL was
widely incorporated in ECE in Zambia. Among the commonly employed PBL
pedagogical practices, teachers consistently incorporated elements such as
games, role plays and dramatic play, storytelling, outdoor activities,
individual work, pair work, group work, demonstrations, as well as rhymes and
songs. However, the study noted a concern about the connectedness of play
activity with the content of the day. It was observed that there was no
connectedness between play activities and the content of the day. In addition,
learning was not captivating enough as teachers were not so creative in using
play as a vehicle to deliver curriculum content to the learners. These findings
have crucial implications for the enhancement of ECE in Zambia. They underscore
the value of competency, focused Continuing Professional Development programmes,
creative teaching approaches, diversification of play activities, and the
intentional alignment of PBL with curriculum content.
