Title: Weekday-to-weekend sleep duration patterns among young adults and outcomes related to health and academic performance
Authors: Cecilie L. Vestergaard, Melanie Rae Simpson, Børge Sivertsen, Håvard Kallestad, Knut Langsrud
ID: openalex.W4403258902
URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/s41606-024-00109-4

Abstract Background To examine whether weekday-to-weekend sleep duration (WWD)
difference and specific WWD patterns are associated with mental and somatic
health and academic performance in a student population. Methods This study
utilized cross-sectional data from the SHoT-2018 survey which includes responses
from 50,054 full-time university/college students in Norway. Participants
completed online questionnaires and reported sleep duration separately for
weekdays and weekends. Medium sleep duration was defined as 7 to 9 h, short
sleep duration as &lt; 7 h and long sleep duration as &gt; 9 h. Regression
analyses were used to examine whether the degree and patterns of WWD was
associated with health-related outcomes and academic performance. Results The
mean age of the sample was 23.2 years and comprised of 68.8% women. Most
students (81.7%) slept longer on weekends compared to weekdays and 30.0% of the
students reported a mean sleep duration shorter than 7 h. WWD difference was
positively associated with higher odds of overweight/obesity, dissatisfaction
with life, psychological distress, somatic burden and failed study exam.
Concerning WWD patterns, the odds of students reporting unfavorably on the
outcomes were particularly high for those who slept short on both weekdays and
weekends, while those who slept short on weekdays seemed to benefit from
sleeping longer (“catching up”) on weekends. Conclusions Overall, WWD was
associated with adverse health outcomes for students. Short sleep duration both
on weekday and weekend was associated with the most detrimental outcomes in
terms of health and academic performance, while sleeping in on weekends may
alleviate some of the detriments.
