Title: Children Don't Like Eating What They're Supposed to Eat… A Study of Public Catering for Children in Hungary from a Historical Perspective
Authors: Vira Réka Nickel
ID: openalex.W4391836229
URL: https://doi.org/10.1556/022.2023.00029

Abstract Childhood nutrition is an important element of lifestyle research,
since the regularity and nutritional content of our meals as children, and the
way in which they are eaten, determine our physical and mental health throughout
our lives. Prior to 2018, there was no basic interdisciplinary research on this
topic in Hungary, thus to fill the gap, an interdisciplinary research group was
established in 2018 at the Institute of Ethnography, which carried out
nationwide research. The present study is based on fieldwork undertaken by the
author in two schools — the János Lenkey Primary School in Eger (formerly
Primary School No. 1) and the Tamás Bolyki Primary School in Ózd — as well as a
large amount of information gleaned from questionnaires and interviews. My
research was also extended in terms of a historical and geographical
perspective: I studied archival sources and expanded the field of my
investigations by including Salgótarján, a research location familiar from my
earlier research, which provided a vantage point alongside Ózd and Eger, as a
third city typical of Northern Hungary. Public catering for children has
undergone significant changes in the last six to seven years, although prior to
this it had appeared relatively uniform, in line with the ingredients available
at the time. The obligation to provide public catering and the general
obligation to work, which began in the Rákosi era and culminated in the Kádár
era, significantly changed family eating habits. Traditional elements typical of
a particular locality disappeared as the globalization efforts of socialism were
accomplished. The ever-decreasing amount of time devoted to preparing, cooking,
and consuming food moved society in the direction of canteens, fast-food
restaurants, and later, after the regime change, global fast-food chains.
Education on proper nutrition is not currently part of academic teacher
training, thus for want of a better alternative, teachers organize children's
school meals based on their own experience and socialization or following the
school's regulations (where they exist), without having a unified concept. The
number of meals eaten at home has been reduced to light breakfasts, lunches, and
dinners, with families mostly sitting down together at the table for dinner,
when they often consume ready meals. Lack of contact with foodstuffs and with
the person preparing the food has a negative impact on children's psychological
development. Relying on extensive basic research and participant observation,
and through the joint efforts of specialists from several fields of the social
sciences, a significant improvement could be achieved in both public catering
and education on healthy nutrition.
