Title: Pages of potential: an action research study of the affordances and constraints of using picture books as tools to deepen adult senses of identity and belonging
Authors: Sarah C.B. Norsworthy
ID: openalex.W4396905648
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.17760/d20649842

Picture books are often underused tools in schools and communities. The purpose
of this research was to investigate the affordances and constraints of using
picture books as tools to deepen senses of identity and belonging. Two cycles of
participatory action research were conducted: the first with educators and the
second with adults who self-identified as being interested in reading and
discussing picture books. Data collection included lifting participant voices
through both semi-structured interviews and focus groups. Cycle 1 interviews and
focus group data were analyzed using In Vivo, Process and Versus Coding. Cycle 2
interview and focus group data were analyzed using In Vivo coding. Themes
identified from Cycle 1 research informed the Cycle 2 action step, which was to
co-create a model for on-line picture book discussions with adults. Weekly
feedback forms, surveys, field notes, and analytic memos were collected and
analyzed. The data combined with a review of extant literature yielded four
findings: (1) adults must first look at themselves through a picture book, then
it may be time to think about others; (2) spaces for adults to read and discuss
picture books, as readers, are both uncommon and needed; (3) collections of
texts and read-alouds increase the transformational potential of picture books;
and (4) the structuring of the conversation matters when using picture books to
deepen senses of identity and belonging, using the model co-created in this
study- A Model for Small, Online, Adult Conversations Grounded in Picture Books
(A MAP)- helps. Bring A MAP. Implications for schools and communities are
offered that center on supporting adults as readers and consumers of picture
books, before considering how picture books might be used with students. More
specifically, this research suggests creating intergenerational spaces for
adults to gather to discuss picture books.--Author's abstract
