Title: Developing Habits of Mind through Family Engineering at Home
Authors: Jubie Tan, Amber Simpson, Peter Knox, Sawsan Werfelli, Adam V. Maltese
ID: openalex.W4391601377
URL: https://doi.org/10.18260/1-2--43081

Abstract Engineering in early education provides the foundation for the future
of innovation. Reinforcing Habits of Mind (HoM) at an early age is crucial for
expanding students' higher order thinking, potential for lifelong learning, and
sense of agency in their learning experiences. HoM is defined as a set of
dispositions that describe how people successfully deal with unexpected life
events, and can be applied to various disciplines such as engineering. This
study addressed two research questions: (1) Which HoM were articulated by
children as they reflected upon their participation in a home-based engineering
program? (2) What patterns of the children's vocabulary align with the HoM
framework? An exploratory mixed-methods design was used to examine young
students' reflections upon the process of completing low-stakes engineering
projects in their home. The participants were 29 children ranging from second
grade to sixth grade. The children and their families were part of a larger
program in which they received researcher-developed engineering kits that
supported their engagement in the engineering design process in their home
environment. After they engaged in the ill-structured engineering task with
family members at home, children joined an online show-and-tell meeting to show
their prototype to others while answering various questions about their
processes, frustrations, and successes. Example questions include (a) "Tell us
about a time you felt like an engineer" and (b) "Find something that represents
how you felt when working with someone in your family." Some children only
joined one show-and-tell while others attended six show-and-tells. To answer the
first research question, two researchers independently watched and collectively
discussed 13 hour-long video recordings. After the children's dialogues were
transcribed across videos, quotes were categorized using a framework that
includes Learning Habits of Mind and Engineering Habits of Mind. This study also
accounted for aesthetic considerations and signs of empathy, which were not
specified in the original framework. To answer the second research question, the
transcripts were analyzed within Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC), a
validated text analysis tool that analyzes over 100 dimensions of text. Initial
findings revealed "Resourcefulness," "Adapting/Improving," and "Systems
Thinking" as the most common Habits of Mind expressed by children through the
show-and-tell meetings. The LIWC analysis highlighted how children's
articulation of Learning and Engineering Habits of Mind were logical (i.e.,
analytical), confident (i.e., clout), and impersonal. Moreover, children's words
were product-oriented, predominantly focusing on the materials and tools
utilized to create their prototype. Few words centered on the emotional
experience and cognitive proactivity of completing the projects. The
significance of this study highlights how engaging in hands-on engineering
projects in the home has the potential to develop children's dispositions and
ways of thinking common to engineers. The children's expressive variability, the
interviewers' open-ended questions, and lack of data on nonverbal communication
introduced challenges to the analysis. Future research may consider how the
design of an engineering program may shape the development of HoM in children.
