Title: Latinx students embodying justice‐centered science: Agency through imagining via the performing arts
Authors: Rebecca Kotler, Maria Rosario, María Varelas, Nathan C. Phillips, Rachelle Palnick Tsachor
ID: openalex.W4391608430
URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/sce.21859

Abstract Children are often denied science education that engages their emotions
and multiple identities. This study focused on ways in which embodied arts‐based
experiences offer opportunities for such engagement in pedagogical efforts
associated with justice‐centered science. The conceptual framework that informed
the study considers the body as a site of learning, embraces social justice in
science education and engages with the dialectical relationship between various
structures and children's agency, and frames the transdisciplinarity of
imagination. The instrumental case study centered on a fifth‐grade class of
Latinx students in an urban public school, as they grappled with lead
contamination and peoples' rights to clean water through an embodied, arts‐based
pedagogy in their science class. Analysis of video clips, student work, and
other artifacts pointed to three findings on how children engaged with
justice‐centered science learning via arts‐based embodied activities. Through
perspective‐taking in the dramatizing, children engaged with science ideas
intertwined with sociopolitical understandings. Through centering emotions that
drama afforded, children experienced empathy and solidarity with others affected
by environmental injustices. Through imagined and enacted participation in
struggles that the embodiments necessitated, children engaged in actions to
resist injustices. These findings suggest that exploring children's arts‐based
embodied meaning making in science is a robust area of inquiry. Furthermore, the
findings compel researchers and practitioners to consider emotions in performing
arts, and how they can deepen engagement in, and exploration of,
justice‐centered science. Recommendations emerged for practitioners poised to
explore justice‐centered science with children through the arts.
