Title: Discovering and developing the vocational teacher identity
Authors: Sofia Antera, Marianne Teräs
ID: openalex.W4391531710
URL: https://doi.org/10.1108/et-09-2023-0363

Purpose This study explores the role of previous occupational identity in the
formation of the (new) teacher identity of vocational teachers. The focus is on
how vocational teachers discover their teaching identity, how they describe the
connection between their previous occupation and teacher identity and how they
describe a competent member of the teaching community.
Design/methodology/approach The theoretical approach is inspired by Communities
of Practice (CoP) theory. More specifically, the realignment between socially
demanded competence in the profession and personal experience as well as
identification with the teaching community are discussed. The research material
comes from 14 interviews with vocational teachers in different disciplines.
Findings Findings indicate first that the process of professional identity
(trans)formation was initiated by finding one's teaching self when the
individuals became aware of their interest in teaching by discovering that they
had already achieved some sort of teaching-related competence. Second,
individuals had been connecting their professional identities – finding common
competence between their previous occupation and the teaching role. Third,
vocational teachers experienced legitimising their competence and their new
identity with reference to what their new CoP instructed as important competence
(regime of competence). Originality/value While teachers' vocational competence
is not scrutinised, their teaching competence needs to be constantly proved.
This imbalance often leads to teachers returning to an aspect of their identity
that is well established – their vocational competence. Looking back to their
occupational competences constitutes a realignment backwards, when teachers
attempt to serve their new professional goal by drawing on old competence.
