Title: Critical perspectives on research with children: reflexivity, methodology, and researcher identity By SarahRichards, SarahCoombs, Bristol University Press. 2023. pp. 192. <scp>ISBN:</scp> 978–1–5292‐1677‐6 (hardcover)
Authors: Leonardo Véliz
ID: openalex.W4395048941
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/chso.12864

This volume edited by Richards and Coombs delves into the nuances of
reflexivity, showcasing contributors' diverse positionalities and experiences in
childhood research. Through nine chapters, the book explores complex themes such
as governance, ethics, identity and sexuality, drawing on the expertise of
contributors from around the world to navigate sensitive issues in reflexive
childhood research. In Chapter 1, Storrod examines the ethical considerations of
institutional ethics committees when conducting research with vulnerable
children. Storrod questions the barriers imposed by ethics committees,
particularly regarding children perceived as threats to researchers, leading to
covert online observations due to restrictions. The critique highlights the
oversight of ethics committees on researchers' well-being and the potential
emotional impact of such research. Similarly, in Chapter 2, Ricon and Dolev-
Cohen focus on ethical challenges related to researching childhood sexuality,
especially sexting. Despite facing obstacles in obtaining institutional approval
for this research, they leverage their roles as mothers to engage in open
discussions about sexting with their own children. This approach reflects their
response to ethical dilemmas and emphasises the importance of addressing
sensitive topics in childhood research. Chapter 3 turns our attention to the
marginalised and silenced voices of children on the peripheries. Sinha
critically explores the impact of colonialism on how childhoods are framed and
researched. Through a reflexive process of re-positioning and re-construction of
‘self’ and ‘other’, Sinha challenges and destabilises Western-centric dominant
thinking and doing around issues pertaining to minoritised, silenced indigenous
children in India. In Chapter 4, Rawat engages reflexively on childhood research
in two sensitive contexts: children of sex workers in India and the experiences
of conflict and resistance among children in Kashmir, India. Rawat's findings
underscore the importance of navigating and enacting varied identity roles when
working with vulnerable populations. In Chapter 5 Stella and Boggis draw
attention to disabled young people. Their study exposes methodological
predicaments in undertaking research with five young disabled people.
Additionally, the researchers stress the importance of reflexivity as an avenue
for adapting and adjusting research processes for greater inclusion and for
integrating the value of researchers' positionings, identities and
subjectivities. In Chapters 6 and 7, the authors delve into a critical
exploration of traditional notions of ‘voice’ within childhood research. They go
beyond simplistic definitions and delve into the multifaceted factors that shape
and influence how children's voices are understood and represented. This nuanced
approach considers the diverse contexts, power dynamics and socio-cultural
factors that impact children's ability to express themselves and be heard.
Chapters 8 and 9 highlight the importance of considering the emotional labour
involved in undertaking childhood research. In Chapter 8, Coombs and Richards
explore the multitude of ‘entanglements’ that conflate at the intersection of
children's perceptions of their playground in the context of a sensitive topic,
the researchers' positionings and positionalities, and the emotionality of both
researchers and children. In a similar realm of emotionality, Montgomery, who
reminisces about her personal struggles of undertaking research on child labour
in Thailand, raises critical personal, methodological and ethical issues. Each
chapter is uniquely contoured by strategies for reflexivity which enabled expert
contributors to not only (re)position their ontological and epistemological
stance on issues of childhood research but also engage in critical dialogue with
existing paradigms and discourses. As I immersed myself in the book, I was
struck by the depth of the researchers' engagement with their own identities,
their research topics, the participants involved and the broader societal
implications of their work. It became evident that each researcher grappled not
only with the theoretical and methodological aspects of their studies but also
with the ethical, emotional and relational dimensions inherent in researching
sensitive topics related to childhood. The intimate relationship between
researchers and their research subjects was palpable, as they navigated complex
power dynamics, ethical dilemmas and the need for genuine empathy and
understanding. Their struggles reflected the inherent challenges of conducting
research with vulnerable populations, such as children from marginalised
communities or those facing social stigma. Teachers, educators and scholars in
childhood research and practice will find this book invaluable as it sheds light
on the complexities of researching childhood, encouraging a more reflective and
ethical approach to teaching, and learning about children's experiences.
Researchers in the field of childhood studies will benefit greatly from the
diverse perspectives and methodologies presented in each chapter, which offer
innovative strategies for navigating ethical dilemmas, engaging with
marginalised voices and promoting social justice in research practices. Leonardo
Veliz PhD is Associate Professor in Language and Literacy in the School of
Education, University of New England, Australia. His research encompasses such
areas as language and diversity, language and gender, multiculturalism,
multilingualism and teacher agency.
