Title: Parental Sexual Education Style and its Impact on Religious Attitude: The Mediating Role of Islamic Spiritual Health
Authors: Fahimeh Rajabi, Sadegheh Salmanpour, Horeye Bayramnejad, Parvaneh Doodman
ID: openalex.W4394992884
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.61838/kman.jarac.6.2.5

Objective: Sexual education presents a series of essential psychological,
physical, and religious information in the domain of individual sexual aspects
along with providing individuals with knowledge and awareness in understanding
the characteristics of the opposite gender. The current study aimed to present a
structural model of sexual education style with the mediating role of spiritual
health on the religious attitudes of high school students in Shiraz. Materials
and Methods: This descriptive-correlational research included all female high
school students in Shiraz during the academic year 2023-2024 and their parents,
with a total of 1234 students selected through cluster random sampling method
according to the Morgan formula. Data collection tools included the Surajzadeh
Religious Attitude Questionnaire, the Islamic Spiritual Health Questionnaire by
Miri et al. (2016), and the Abdollahzadeh and Keykhosravi Sexual Education Style
Questionnaire. Data were analyzed using Amos software. Findings: The findings
indicated that the permissive sexual education style has a direct negative
effect on spiritual health. Furthermore, the relationship between this style and
religious attitude is negatively significant considering the mediating role of
spiritual health. Additionally, the authoritative style has a direct and
significant effect on spiritual health, and the relationship between this style
and religious attitude is positively significant considering the mediating role
of spiritual health. The authoritarian style has no direct or indirect
relationship with spiritual health and religious attitude. Also, spiritual
health has a direct and significant effect on religious attitude. Conclusion: In
conclusion, sexual education plays a pivotal role in imparting psychological,
physical, and religious knowledge. The study elucidated a structural model of
sexual education, revealing the permissive style's detrimental impact on
spiritual health, while the authoritative style positively influenced both
spiritual health and religious attitudes among high school students in Shiraz.
