Title: Supporting preservice teachers to navigate the tensions of teaching English Language Arts: An examination of two teacher educator's literacies pedagogies
Authors: Lori McKee, Tara-Lynn Scheffel
ID: openalex.W4403673962
URL: https://doi.org/10.20360/langandlit29699

In 1997-1998, we taught in the same independently funded elementary school. As
teachers of Grade 1 and Grade 2, the school leadership asked us to research and
recommend a program to support early reading instruction and replace the
outdated basal readers. Opinions were sometimes diverse as we met with parents
and school board members to identify beliefs/priorities in early reading
instruction. More than 25 years later, in our work as teacher educators in two
provinces, we are embroiled in similar conversations about reading instruction
in a field mapped by polarizing views expressed in reports, social media, and
teacher professional texts. As teacher educators, we recognize: 1) this context
as challenging for preservice teachers to enter professional practice and 2) our
role in supporting preservice teachers in entering the field. This was the
impetus for a research study examining our pedagogies. We ask: How are we, as
teacher educators, supporting preservice teachers to navigate the theoretical
and practical tensions of teaching Language Arts through our pedagogies? In this
article, we share findings from a collaborative Self-Study of Teacher Education
Practice (S-STEP) where we leverage our long-standing relationship as critical
friends in research/teaching to examine our teacher education pedagogies in our
elementary English Language Arts courses in 2022-2023. Data sources include
teaching artifacts (e.g., syllabi, powerpoints, activities) and videorecordings
of discussions as we share these artifacts over Zoom. Guided by posthuman
perspectives, we consider the non-human and human entities that were a part of
our pedagogies. Analysis is currently underway. Preliminary findings suggest a
shift from sharing particular practices with each other to a focus on decision-
making to support preservice teachers in weighing the desires of teaching
practices in literacies as well as diffusing binaries. This article highlights
teacher education practices as relational and moving in response to context.
