Title: Empirical insights into traditional and AI enhanced interactive narratives based on children’s fables
Authors: Urszula Świerczyńska-Kaczor
ID: openalex.W4392916700
URL: https://doi.org/10.22367/jem.2024.46.02

Aim/purpose – The study delves into the creation and the experience of
interactive children’s narratives based on poetry, examining the emerging role
of artificial intelli- gence (AI) as a collaborative partner in storytelling for
children. The research questions are: 1) What are the experiences of readers,
specifically children’s guardians, with inter- active narratives based on
children’s poetry?; 2) How do children’s guardians experience inter-active
stories co-generated in real-time through conversations with artificial intelli-
gence?; 3) Is it feasible to create a satisfying narrative for children from a
specific set of images through the use of AI technology?
Design/methodology/approach – This paper synthesizes findings from the following
studies: a) Qualitative analysis of interactive narratives based on Stanisław
Jachowicz’s poems, involving a comprehensive online questionnaire survey, with
80 respondents participating in the latest study; b) An evaluative study focused
on real-time interactions with AI-generated interactive narratives based on
Stanisław Jachowicz’s poems. This involved 12 participants who provided detailed
feedback on their experience; c) An autoethnographic study exploring the
creative process of generating children’s narratives from a set of images using
AI. Findings – The findings from the exploratory studies suggested that
interactive narra- tives based on poetry would be beneficial for education and
the promotion of reading. The interactive narrative can be simply designed
(simple mechanics, simple options) and nevertheless, it can evoke a positive
user experience. The constructs of telepresence and player agency apply not only
to the interactive narrative and the poem that serves as its foundation. The
evaluation of the interactive narrative generated by ChatGPT was posi- tive,
both as real-time interactive storytelling experienced by the reader with AI and
as the interactive narrative created based on a set of images. In the process of
generating interactive narratives during real-time interactions, ensuring
safety, reliability, and trust- worthiness for children is a crucial aspect.
Research implications/limitations – The research suggests that educational
organiza- tions can benefit from introducing interactive narratives based on
poetry into children’s curricula. Furthermore, artificial intelligence can be
effectively utilized in creating such content, both in the form of traditional
interactive narratives presented to children and in real-time interactions with
AI. However, it is also important for organizations to develop tools for
monitoring children’s safety. Originality/value/contribution – This paper sheds
light on the reader’s experience with interactive narratives based on poetry and
highlights the transformative impact of AI on reading and writing in children’s
literature, emphasizing how significantly the roles of writers and readers have
changed with the introduction of AI. The swift evolution of artificial
intelligence raises concerns that vital literary participants – including
authors, researchers, publishers, and readers – may not grasp the essential
skills and knowledge for utilizing AI. This paper can be helpful for these
groups as it provides clues on how to produce good prompts, leading to the
creation of children’s narratives. Keywords: art studies, Human-Centered AI,
interactive narrative, game development, user experience. JEL Classification:
Z11, L86, M31.
