Title: Integrated Approach to Chronic Pain—The Role of Psychosocial Factors and Multidisciplinary Treatment: A Narrative Review
Authors: Irena Kovačević, Jadranka Pavić, Biljana Filipović, Štefanija Ozimec Vulinec, Boris Ilić
ID: openalex.W4401962339
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph21091135

Background: Chronic non-malignant pain represents a growing global public health
priority. Chronic pain is multifactorial, with numerous biological,
psychological, and social factors contributing to this pain syndrome. It affects
not only the patients, impairing their quality of life, but also their family
and social environment. Chronic pain is a diagnosis and requires effective and
sustainable treatment strategies. Objective: Our aim was to critically review
the available evidence on the importance of different approaches in treating
patients with chronic non-malignant pain, emphasizing the effectiveness of
integrating psychological and social factors within a multidisciplinary
framework. Methods: This was a non-systematic narrative review of the basic and
recent literature analyzing approaches to the treatment of chronic non-malignant
pain. The inclusion criteria for the papers were chronic non-malignant pain,
treatment approach, review, and original research papers published in English in
the last five years (PubMed search), and the basic literature was selected from
the references of new papers according to the knowledge and experience of the
authors. Results: This literature review included 120 papers, of which 83 were
basic, and 37 were new, published in the last 5 years (2018–2023). The results
show that both the basic and newly published literature advocate for a
biopsychosocial approach to treating chronic pain. Conclusions: New findings,
compared to the earlier literature, indicate a new classification of chronic
pain into primary and secondary. Chronic pain should be approached with a
biopsychosocial model within a multidisciplinary treatment framework. This model
addresses the complex interplay of biological, psychological, and social
factors, offering a holistic strategy for effective pain management.
