Title: Querying Databases with Function Calling
Authors: Connor Shorten, Charles Pierse, Thomas Benjamin Smith, Karel D'Oosterlinck, Tuana Celik, Erika Cardenas, Leonie Monigatti, Mohd Shukri Hasan, Edward Schmuhl, Daniel Williams, Aravind Kesiraju, Bob van Luijt
ID: 2502.00032
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.00032

Abstract:
The capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) are rapidly accelerating largely thanks to their integration with external tools. Querying databases is among the most effective of these integrations, enabling LLMs to access private or continually updating data. While Function Calling is the most common method for interfacing external tools to LLMs, its application to database querying as a tool has been underexplored. We propose a tool definition for database querying that unifies accessing data with search queries, filters, or a combination both, as well as transforming results with aggregation and groupby operators. To evaluate its effectiveness, we conduct a study with 8 LLMs spanning 5 model families. We present a novel pipeline adapting the Gorilla LLM framework to create synthetic database schemas and queries. We primarily evaluate the models with the Exact Match of predicted and ground truth query APIs. Among the models tested, Claude 3.5 Sonnet achieves the highest performance with an Exact Match score of 74.3%, followed by GPT-4o mini at 73.7%, and GPT-4o at 71.8%. We further breakdown these results per API component utilized and across synthetic use cases. We find that LLMs are highly effective at utilizing operators on boolean properties, but struggle with text property filters. Across use cases we find robust results with the higher performing models such as GPT-4o, but significant performance variance across use cases from lower performing models. We additionally conduct ablation studies exploring the impact of parallel tool calling, adding a rationale as an argument of the tool call, using a separate tool per database collection, and tool calling with structured outputs. Our findings demonstrate the effectiveness of enabling LLMs to query databases with Function Calling. We have open-sourced our experimental code and results at github.com/weaviate/gorilla.
