Title: HiPRAG: Hierarchical Process Rewards for Efficient Agentic Retrieval Augmented Generation
Authors: Peilin Wu, Mian Zhang, Kun Wan, Wentian Zhao, Kaiyu He, Xinya Du, Zhiyu Chen
ID: 2510.07794
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.07794

Abstract:
Agentic RAG is a powerful technique for incorporating external information that LLMs lack, enabling better problem solving and question answering. However, suboptimal search behaviors exist widely, such as over-search (retrieving information already known) and under-search (failing to search when necessary), which leads to unnecessary overhead and unreliable outputs. Current training methods, which typically rely on outcome-based rewards in a RL framework, lack the fine-grained control needed to address these inefficiencies. To overcome this, we introduce Hierarchical Process Rewards for Efficient agentic RAG (HiPRAG), a training methodology that incorporates a fine-grained, knowledge-grounded process reward into the RL training. Our approach evaluates the necessity of each search decision on-the-fly by decomposing the agent's reasoning trajectory into discrete, parsable steps. We then apply a hierarchical reward function that provides an additional bonus based on the proportion of optimal search and non-search steps, on top of commonly used outcome and format rewards. Experiments on the Qwen2.5 and Llama-3.2 models across seven diverse QA benchmarks show that our method achieves average accuracies of 65.4% (3B) and 67.2% (7B). This is accomplished while improving search efficiency, reducing the over-search rate to just 2.3% and concurrently lowering the under-search rate. These results demonstrate the efficacy of optimizing the reasoning process itself, not just the final outcome. Further experiments and analysis demonstrate that HiPRAG shows good generalizability across a wide range of RL algorithms, model families, sizes, and types. This work demonstrates the importance and potential of fine-grained control through RL, for improving the efficiency and optimality of reasoning for search agents.
