Title: Confining Spaces, Resistant Subjectivities: Toward a Metachronous Discourse of Literary Mapping and Transformation in Postcolonial Women's Writing
Authors: Kinana Hamam
ID: openalex.W3132124753
URL: 

This thesis takes as its starting point Chandra Talpade Mohanty’s argument that
it is the way in which “Third World” women’s narratives are read and understood
that is crucial, together with the need to locate them contextually. My original
contribution to knowledge is to develop a deconstructive, cultural analysis
through the re–reading of a selection of core postcolonial women’s texts written
in former colonial societies, at a time prior to the full emergence of
postcolonialism as a set of theoretical concepts and before feminism had
developed its major contribution to academic scholarship. These theories are
examined in the first three chapters of the thesis. This re–reading is of texts
which arguably prefigured in many ways some of the main debates later
articulated in postcolonial feminist criticism, thus (re–)interpreting them
through a contemporary, critical lens. The objective of the textual analysis,
among other things, is to underline the function of literary mapping in
postcolonial women’s writing and the ways in which this resonates with key
issues in postcolonial feminist studies. For example, the texts subvert the
figure of the “universal woman” challenged by several critics, undermine images
of women’s sameness, and transform marginalising spaces such as prison and home
into sites of possible resistance. Overall, the main contribution of this thesis
is twofold. Firstly, the interpretation of postcolonial women’s writing as a
metachronous discourse of literary mapping in order to reclaim rather than deny
the difference and complexity inherent in women’s texts and identities. This
lends a wider dimension to the literary representations of women and justifies
my attempt to order the texts as following an inverted rite of passage.
Secondly, this thesis demonstrates that postcolonial women’s writing constitutes
a discourse of literary activism and a cultural archive of prismatic female
narratives which demands a responsive reading of the texts. This is to form a
collective, critical consciousness from which, it is hoped, present and future
communities of women can learn to change their lives.
