Title: Picturing the Reader: English Education Pre-service Teachers' Beliefs About Reading Using Photovoice
Authors: Michael DiCicco
ID: openalex.W2169361295
URL: https://digitalcommons.usf.edu/etd/5210

As students begin secondary school, they are charged with learning more content,
at a faster pace and with increased pressure from accountability measures
(Dreschler, Shumaker, &amp; Woodruff, 2004). If secondary students' reading
difficulties are not identified and remedied, the gap between struggling readers
and their peers widens every academic year (Edmonds, Vaughn, Wexler, Rutebuch,
Cable, Tackett, and Schnakenberg, 2009).\nThe task of reading instruction
primarily falls on English teachers, but Strickland and Alvermann (2004) note
that while secondary English Teachers do have more preparation in reading
instruction compared to other content area teachers, they are not as prepared as
they need to be and do not provide reading instruction even when given the
opportunity. Additionally, little attention has been given to how teacher should
be taught to teach reading (Moats &amp; Foorman, 2003) and even less attention
has been given to reading instruction at the secondary level (Edmonds, et al.,
2009).\nPre-service teacher's beliefs influence how they take in information
presented in their teacher education program and classroom instructional
decisions (Holt-Reynolds, 1992; Richardson, 2003). However few studies have
examined English education pre-service teachers beliefs about teaching
struggling readers at the secondary level. The purpose of this study is to
describe and explain secondary English education pre-service teachers' beliefs
about teaching struggling readers using Photovoice.\nThis study uses a
combination of constructivism, Lakoff and Johnson's concept of metaphor, and
interpretivism as the theoretical framework. Research methods examining beliefs
often involve using surveys or interviews (i.e. Sadaf, Newby, &amp; Ertmer,
2012; Sandvik, van Dall, &amp; Ader, 2013). However, these methods may not
provide as representational responses as a method that allows participants to
respond through multiple mediums and through metaphor. This study uses a
modified version of the Photovoice method to examine secondary English education
pre-service teachers' beliefs. Because Photovoice has not been used to examine
beliefs of this population, an additional aim of this study is to examine
Photovoice as a reflection method. The research questions guiding this study
are:\n1. What are English education pre-service teacher beliefs' about teaching
struggling adolescent readers?\n2. What are English education pre-service
teacher beliefs about themselves as readers?\n3. In what ways, if any, did
Photovoice facilitate reflection on beliefs about reading instruction?\nFindings
suggest English education pre-service teachers had not considered struggling
readers as part of their classrooms, did not understand the complexities of the
reading process, held a deficit view of struggling readers, assumed a teacher's
identity, saw reading as an experience/event, found the discussion in the
Photovoice process helpful in reflection, Photovoice helped address some issues
with teacher reflection, and Photovoice helped develop as well as capture
beliefs. Implications for teacher education are discussed.
