Title: Theorizing the Active Body in Children's Sport Fiction: A Foucauldian Textual Analysis
Authors: Katie Davies
ID: openalex.W2806677084
URL: https://doi.org/10.7939/r3dn4020j

Children’s literature is a powerful medium through which meanings about the body
are normalized and conveyed during childhood (Hunt, 1985; Peterson-Bender &amp;
Lach, 1990; Rogers, 1999; Rogers, 2008; Saric, 2005; Stallcup, 2004). Although
textual analysis is a common approach to the socio-cultural study of the body,
the primary sources include print media such as sports magazines, sport
advertisements, as well as sport broadcasts, and news reports with only few
literary analysis of adult/adolescent sports fiction (e.g., Kane, 1998; Kriegh
&amp; Kane, 1997; Markula, 2000; Singleton, 2006, 2009; Whiteside, Hardin,
Decarvalho, Carillo &amp; Smith, 2013). In this dissertation, I engage in
Foucauldian textual analysis of children’s picture books to deepen the
understanding of how meanings about the active body are re/produced and
sustained through children’s sport fiction. I, therefore, employ Foucauldian
discourse analysis (FDA) to analyze how children’s bodies are represented in a
sample of 30 children’s books published between 2007 and 2012 and how these
representation are linked to power/discourse nexus in contemporary society. In
addition, I employ Foucault’s (1977) disciplinary techniques—the art of
distributions, the control of activity, the organization of genesis, and the
composition of forces—to analyze the illustrations. For the purpose of my
analysis, I divide the sample into 6 ballet books, 11 team sport books, and 13
books on leisure, exercise, and physical activity. My Foucauldian analysis
resulted in three major themes across the books. First, the active body is
portrayed with slim build, slender arms and legs, often with slightly protruding
tummies, and large heads in proportion to the rest of the body. Second, the
representation of the bodies is gendered: female protagonists engaged with
clothing and physical appearance whereas male protagonists focused on winning.
Male protagonists face problems and experienced success at a group or team
level, whereas female protagonists tended to deal with issues at an individual
level. Third, the active child’s body is disciplined and then achieves success,
happiness, and acceptance of others. In conclusion, a slender body is normalized
as achieving success and happiness through disciplined physical activity. While
there are some gender differences, the books demonstrate how other children,
teachers, and parents, who judge and survey acceptable engagement in activity,
maintain discipline through hierarchal observation. This representation is
limiting because it normalizes a certain type of body as acceptable,
appropriate, and permissible, which, in turn, renders those bodies that do not
fit this representation, invisible. The active body is re/produced and sustained
by several discourses such as how the moving body should feel (psychology), how
the moving body should be (health), and how the moving body should look
(aesthetics). In turn, these discourses render the individual responsible for
feeling good, being healthy, and looking good as defined by the neoliberal
society.
