Title: Texting conscientizaçäo? A study of immigrant Latina/o adults and mobile learning
Authors: Karla Cristina Perez-Mendoza
ID: openalex.W214031822
URL: https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0z06c5d1

This cross-sectional case analysis explored the human dimensions in the study of
literacy and technology. The study focused on the semi-structured interviews of
15 Latina/o immigrant adults acquiring basic critical literacy skills over a
mobile phone. In the interviews, these emergent readers shared their history of
participation (Rogers, 2004) in education and in literacy practices. Their
narratives of lived experiences framed the analysis of mobile learning. In this
study, situated affordances referred to the contextualized capacities of new
technologies (Gibson, 1979; Gomez, Gomez &amp;amp; Gifford, 2010; Mynatt et al.,
1998; Zywica, Richards &amp;amp; Gomez, 2011). Approaching the analysis from the
histories and perspectives of the participants rendered a powerful human account
about populations typically neglected in the study of education and technology.
\tIn addition, the context-specific afforances narrated by the participants
transformed the study of mobile learning by including marginalized perspectives.
Lastly, this study documented the impact of mobile learning. Those who completed
the mobile learning experience also re-invented themselves as learners through
their narratives. Thus, mobile learning presented an opportunity for
participants to develop literacy while also re-writing their histories as
learners. This study documented the transformative capacities of mobile learning
among marginalized groups. At the same time, the narratives cautioned against
the isolation of technology from the human aspects of learning. In the
conclusion, I presented the limitations to mobile learning. Many of these
limitations stemed from human needs, including the challenges faced by this
population. In addition, the conluding chapter grappled with future design
modifications that capitalize on the affordances of mobile devices for this
population of emergent readers. Special attention was given to the development
of critical literacy as found in a Freirean model of adult education.
