Title: The Socialization Model of National Character Education for Students in Elementary School Through Comic
Authors: Tri Astuti, Elly Kismini, Kuncoro Bayu Prasetyo
ID: openalex.W1558506966
URL: https://doi.org/10.15294/komunitas.v6i2.3305

Realizing the character building on students is a national education goal. The
character education is very important for the students. Therefore, the
socialization and enculturation of national character education in schools by
using an effective and efficient method are needed. This study aims to
understand the process of socialization of character education in elementary
school, to find the effective way of socialization models of national character
education for students in elementary school through comics, and to determine the
impact of socialization models of national character education for students in
elementary school through the comic for the character building of students. This
research was conducted using qualitative methods (Research Development). The
data collection techniques used were interviews, observation and documentation.
The results show that the socialization of the nation’s character education in
primary schools is done in several ways; integrated with in the curriculum
through the school management, and through extracurricular programs. Those ways
do not seem to produce maximum results. Socialization model of the national
character of education in the elementary schools through the comic is more
effective to apply, because students are more interested in the visualization of
interesting and familiar images.Menyadari pembangunan karakter siswa adalah
tujuan pendidikan nasional. Pendidikan karakter sangat penting bagi para siswa.
Oleh karena itu, sosialisasi dan enkulturasi pendidikan karakter bangsa di
sekolah-sekolah dengan menggunakan metode yang efektif dan efisien diperlukan.
Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk memahami proses sosialisasi pendidikan karakter
di sekolah dasar, untuk menemukan cara yang efektif untuk model sosialisasi
pendidikan karakter bangsa bagi siswa di sekolah dasar melalui komik, dan untuk
menentukan dampak dari model sosialisasi pendidikan karakter bangsa bagi siswa
di sekolah dasar melalui komik untuk membangun karakter siswa. Penelitian ini
dilakukan dengan menggunakan metode kualitatif (Research Development). Teknik
pengumpulan data yang digunakan adalah wawancara, observasi dan dokumentasi.
Hasil menunjukkan bahwa sosialisasi pendidikan karakter bangsa di sekolah dasar
ini dilakukan dengan beberapa cara, terintegrasi dengan subjek termasuk, melalui
manajemen sekolah, dan melalui program ekstrakurikuler. Mereka cara tampaknya
tidak menghasilkan hasil yang maksimal. Model Sosialisasi karakter nasional
pendidikan di sekolah dasar melalui komik lebih efektif untuk diterapkan, karena
siswa lebih tertarik pada visualisasi gambar yang menarik dan akrab.
