Title: Being Woman in the Land of Shari‘a: Politics of the Female Body, Piety, and Resistance in Langsa, Aceh
Authors: Muhammad Ansor
ID: openalex.W1967529631
URL: https://doi.org/10.14421/ajis.2014.521.59-83

&lt;p&gt;This study investigates the dynamic of institutionalization of Shari’a
in Aceh, which focuses on analysis of the patterns of Langsa women’s resistance
against religious leaders and state interpretations of the dress standards in
the public space. This matter emerged because the implementation of Shari’a has
been supported by local people, but the standard of Islamic dress that should be
applied is still debatable among various groups in Aceh that have varied
understandings and different religious visions. The regulation of dress code has
been an issue for religious leaders, intellectuals, and Moslem activists. The
resistance of Langsa women against the politics of body discipline could be open
and secret. To analyze the forms of women’s resistance, the researcher applied
James C. Scott’s hidden transcripts theory. Inspired by this theoretical
framework, the researcher found that Langsa women, intellectuals, and religious
leaders expressed their resistance over how women should dress in public space.
In collecting the data, the researcher used observation, in-depth interviews,
and focus group discussions. Accordingly, the research shows how Langsa women
express their resistance towards religious hegemony and state interpretation of
Islam.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;p&gt;[Tulisan ini membahas dinamika pelembagaan syariat
Islam di Aceh dengan fokus resistensi tersembunyi perempuan Langsa terhadap
penafsiran elite agama dan pemerintah perihal pembakuan standar pakaian di ruang
publik. Meskipun implementasi syariat Islam Aceh mendapat dukungan masyarakat
setempat, tetapi ketika sebuah tafsir tertentu tentang pakaian Islami dibakukan
dalam regulasi (Qanun), muncul perdebatan dari sebagian muslim yang berpola
pemikiran dan visi keagamaan berbeda. Bukan hanya perdebatan di kalangan elite
agama, intelektual, maupun aktivis, perempuan di berbagai daerah di Aceh pun
mengekspresikan resistensi, baik secara terbuka maupun tersembunyi. Peneliti
menggunakan teori hidden transcripts sebagaimana dikemukakan James C. Scott
untuk menganalisa resistensi tersebut. Data dikumpulkan melalui observasi,
wawancara mendalam, serta diskusi kelompok terfokus (FGD). Penelitian ini
memperlihatkan bagaimana perempuan Langsa mengekspresikan resistensi tersembunyi
atas hegemoni elite agama dan pemerintah dalam menafsirkan Islam].&lt;/p&gt;
