Title: Honey Ant Readers
Authors: Margaret O. James
ID: openalex.W4375841029
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.47381/aijre.v24i1.680

On entering school, rural Australian children from Indigenous backgrounds are
thrown into an unfamiliar environment, linguistically and culturally, which sets
them up for failure. The author, working closely with elders and community in
Alice Springs, has drawn on her considerable experience in both Indigenous
education and TESOL to address this disadvantage by developing a progressive
series of early readers specifically targeted to rural Indigenous learners. This
innovative series of books and resources is developed to teach both reading and
Standard Australian English (SAE) to speakers of Aboriginal English (AE). The
presenter will outline the research, development, theory, publication and
application of the Honey Ant Readers and will discuss their adaptability for all
languages. Focussing on the particular needs of Indigenous learners, and to
assist them in acquiring reading, the content is made relevant by using
Indigenous themes, stories and characters. Reading is scaffolded across 20 books
in the following ways: the language moves from a light form of AE (referred to
as ‘The language of the playground’) to SAE following natural stages of second
language acquisition; phonic words, selected for their phonemic closeness to
Central Australian Aboriginal languages are introduced gradually; the
illustrations become more complex and the size and amount of text is graduated.
The themes and style of storytelling are Indigenous, as are the characters in
the books. Characters are referred to according to their role within family,
rather than by name, for cultural reasons. The presenter will demonstrate and
share ideas on the use of interactive, supplementary resources, designed to
reinforce the material in the HARs, and to engage learners of all ages,
including teenagers, through physical participation and fun. Songs and rhymes,
central to the pedagogy, are used to reinforce Standard English grammar and
pronunciation, as well as the four macro skills of language learning: reading,
writing, speaking and listening. Results at this early stage show that as
students engage with the materials and relate to the subject matter of the
books, they find it easier to start reading. With an increased interest in
reading, their literacy and oral language acquisition is accelerated. Of
particular significance, parents are also engaging with their children’s
literacy learning as the materials are equally relevant to them. The speaker
will discuss the latest HAR research findings. The principles of the pedagogy
and methodology in the HARs are being applied to other learners throughout
Australia and overseas. The first Readers for Chinese and Ghanaian ESL learners
have been published, and the HARs have been translated into 6 Aboriginal
languages.
