Title: The Antecedents and Consequences of Affordable Value Innovations for Emerging Markets
Authors: Holger Ernst, Hanna Nari Kahle, Anna Dubiel, Jaideep Prabhu, Mohan Subramaniam
ID: openalex.W2761494259
URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12171

Emerging markets offer tremendous growth opportunities for firms. While
established multinational firms typically focus on premium segments in emerging
markets, they often fail to leverage additional growth opportunities in
so‐called good enough or low‐income segments in emerging markets. Customers in
these low‐income markets have substantially different requirements and are very
price sensitive. Theoretical and case‐based research suggests that innovating
for these low‐income segments in emerging markets differs significantly from
innovating for premium or traditional W estern markets. We argue that tapping
successfully into low‐income segments in emerging markets requires the
development of new products that meet the low price expectations while at the
same time offering also value to customers in these segments. We refer to these
new products as affordable value innovations. We analyze the antecedents of
affordable value innovation for emerging markets. We draw on institutional
theory to derive three potentially relevant antecedents of affordable value
innovation for emerging markets. These are bricolage, local embeddedness, and
standardization. We test our hypotheses using multiple informant data from 47
multinational corporations involving 103 innovation projects that target
low‐income customers in emerging markets. Our empirical analysis shows that all
three antecedents have significant effects on the level of affordable value
innovation: while bricolage and local embeddedness are positively related to the
level of affordable value innovation, standardization has a negative impact. We
also examine the relationship between the level of affordable value innovation
and performance. We find evidence for our basic assumption that a firm's
capability to develop and launch affordable value innovations is key to success
in emerging markets. It indicates that a firm's investments in affordable value
innovations for emerging markets pay off financially. Finally, a cross‐regional
comparison of our data shows that the key findings on antecedents of affordable
value innovation and its impact on performance do not vary across various
emerging markets. Overall, our findings offer important implications for
research on and the practice of innovation for low‐income segments in emerging
markets.
