Title: Public Sector and Corruption in Nigeria: An Ethical and Institutional Framework of Analysis
Authors: K. C. Ani Casimir, Edwin Izueke, Ifeoma Florence Nzekwe
ID: openalex.W2068995886
URL: https://doi.org/10.4236/ojpp.2014.43029

The paper examines the imperatives of good ethical conduct in the conduct of
government business in Nigeria. As government business grows in complexity with
the adoption of technological innovations in government, governance in Nigeria’s
public sector becomes more problematic and ethically tasking as a result of
endemic corruption. An evaluation of the collapse of institutional measures and
codes of conduct puts in place to ensure high standard of behavior, using
institutional theory suggests that moral contradictions in institutional
behavior expectation from the public deepen daily. The perceived lack of an
effective ethical organizational framework to coordinate the activities of
various institutions has astronomically worsened unethical practices such as
corruption in the Nigerian public service. The paper recommends a more realistic
African traditional approach to ethical restraint of public servants from
indulging in corrupt behavior by subjecting them to customary oath taking based
upon the theistic values of fear of sin against mother earth (Ani Casimir,
2009), (a departure from the western style, which sees public service as no
man’s business: Ekene, 2012). These core African values that emanate from
theistic humanism should also permeate the various anti-corruption
organizational frameworks in Nigeria to coordinate the national fight against
corruption in the public sector. The behavioral and errant departure of civil
servants and Nigeria’s public service from the core human values that ensure
transparent private and public conduct of individuals have resulted in
underperformance and underdevelopment. It is perceived furthermore that this
lack of public service commitment to human values which would have enabled them
to consider others above selfish interests, fear divine retribution, dishonor of
a good family name, distaste for greed and stealing of public good has weakened
the fight against corruption and turned it into a pedantic and cosmetic exercise
without results. Therefore, unethical practices and the systemic abandonment of
core African human values by the Nigerian public servants oil the wheel of
public sector corruption in Nigeria.
