Title: Watching TV and Food Intake: The Role of Content
Authors: Colin D. Chapman, Victor C. Nilsson, Hanna Å. Thune, Jonathan Cedernaes, Madeleine Le Grevès
ID: openalex.W2001421778
URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0100602

Obesity is a serious and growing health concern worldwide. Watching television
(TV) represents a condition during which many habitually eat, irrespective of
hunger level. However, as of yet, little is known about how the content of
television programs being watched differentially impacts concurrent eating
behavior. In this study, eighteen normal-weight female students participated in
three counter-balanced experimental conditions, including a 'Boring' TV
condition (art lecture), an 'Engaging' TV condition (Swedish TV comedy series),
and a no TV control condition during which participants read (a text on insects
living in Sweden). Throughout each condition participants had access to both
high-calorie (M&Ms) and low-calorie (grapes) snacks. We found that, relative to
the Engaging TV condition, Boring TV encouraged excessive eating (+52% g, P =
0.009). Additionally, the Engaging TV condition actually resulted in
significantly less concurrent intake relative to the control 'Text' condition
(-35% g, P = 0.05). This intake was driven almost entirely by the healthy snack,
grapes; however, this interaction did not reach significance (P = 0.07).
Finally, there was a significant correlation between how bored participants were
across all conditions, and their concurrent food intake (beta = 0.317, P =
0.02). Intake as measured by kcals was similarly patterned but did not reach
significance. These results suggest that, for women, different TV programs
elicit different levels of concurrent food intake, and that the degree to which
a program is engaging (or alternately, boring) is related to that intake.
Additionally, they suggest that emotional content (e.g. boring vs. engaging) may
be more associated than modality (e.g. TV vs. text) with concurrent intake.
