Title: Visual arts in ECE: Strengthening intentional teaching through a network professional learning community
Authors: Rachel Denee
ID: openalex.W4214864592
URL: https://doi.org/10.26686/wgtn.19289435

&lt;p&gt;Over the past 100 years, educationalists such as Dewey and Eisner have
proposed radical and progressive ways in which visual art can support and enrich
learning in education (Lindsay, 2016b). The early childhood pedagogy of Reggio
Emilia, in Italy, is a renowned example of how teachers take an active role in
facilitating children’s artistic abilities with positive outcomes for children’s
learning (Gandini et al., 2005). However, in New Zealand (NZ) early childhood
education (ECE), visual arts teaching for young children is still enacted within
a largely developmental frame, using a hands-off approach (Terreni, 2017).
According to Lindsay (2021) and Smyth (2017), teachers’ self-efficacy beliefs,
knowledge and skills in art education need to be addressed in order to shift
practice. Professional learning communities (PLCs) offer the potential to
challenge teachers’ assumptions and beliefs and to foster transformative
learning, resulting in observable shifts in art teaching practice (Damjanovic
&amp; Blank, 2017; Servage, 2008). This mixed methods study (Johnson &amp;
Christensen, 2019) within an interpretivist paradigm (Schwandt, 1994), examined
the perceptions and practices of NZ ECE teachers about art education through a
nationwide survey and a professional learning intervention using a network PLC
approach. Situated and social cognitive theories, socio-cultural theory and
transformative learning theory were interlinked in a bricolage approach (Tobin,
2018) to form a theoretical lens for this study. The first stage of the research
involved a survey of ECE teachers regarding practices and perceptions about
visual arts, and this provided a background context for the PLC project. Key
survey findings included a dominant developmentalist view of children’s art
learning amongst ECE teachers and confusion about the role of the teacher. In
the embedded case study, a network PLC was established with seven teachers from
four ECE services, meeting over 9 months with a mixture of practical and
reflective learning about visual arts. The data collection included multiple
sources for rich analysis: interviews; reflective writing; meeting dialogue;
photographs; and learning story assessment documentation. Case study findings
included the value of reflective and practical learning for visual arts
teaching, the impact of a network PLC on the practice and perceptions of both
the participants and their colleagues, the critical place of teacher self-
efficacy in visual arts teaching practice, and the importance of leadership of
various actors across the network to support the application and sharing of new
learning. Overall, the outcomes of this study have important implications for
visual arts pedagogy in ECE and effective professional learning approaches for
teachers.&lt;/p&gt;
