Title: The acceptability of photovoice as a method for incorporating resilience-enhancing factors into pediatric pain research
Authors: Elizabeth Donovan, Katherina Tanson, Sarah R. Martin, Georgia Weston, Anya Griffin
ID: openalex.W4294354080
URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0272504

Recurrent or chronic pain affects 11-38% of children and adolescents. Pediatric
pain research typically focuses on risk factors, such as anxiety and parent
functional disability, but resilience-building, protective factors also play an
important role in the pain experience. New methods to incorporate resilience-
enhancing factors into pain research are needed. Photovoice is a highly
participatory research method, where participants take photos to address a
common question, caption their photos, and discuss the meaning of the photos in
a group. The main objective of this study was to determine whether photovoice is
an acceptable method to young people living with chronic pain for identifying
and sharing sources of joy. Another objective was to explore sources of joy.
Sixteen adolescents and young adults participated, which involved meeting in a
group to discuss the goal of the study, taking photographs of self-identified
sources of joy over a two-week period, and meeting as a group again to discuss
the photographs and participate in a focus group about the experience. Results
suggest that photovoice is an acceptable method, as all participants took
photographs and attended both meetings, and three themes from the focus group
data suggested the participants considered photovoice to be appropriate: 1.)
Relief associated with meeting peers, 2.) Potential to benefit young people
living with pain, and 3.) Potential to raise awareness. Three themes emerged
from the discussion of the photographs to describe sources of joy: 1.) Gratitude
for everyday pleasures and accomplishments, 2.) Support from pets, and 3.)
Journey of acceptance. Results add to the strengths-based literature on
pediatric pain by identifying an acceptable method that could be further
explored for use as an intervention to enhance protective factors such as
positive affect, gratitude, and social support and to compare the experiences of
different populations of youth living with pain.
