Title: Erasmus+sport let’s move Europa: learning units for health promotion among children and adolescents
Authors: Alice Masini, G Zanutto, G. Longo, Sofia Marini, Giorgia Soldà
ID: openalex.W4307253237
URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/eurpub/ckac131.463

Abstract Background School years are crucial for acquiring life-lasting healthy
habits. However, an increasing rate of children and adolescents fail to maintain
a healthy lifestyle. European Union has financed the Erasmus+ Sport Let’s Move
Europa project to design an innovative digital tool for promoting healthy
lifestyles among those age groups. University of Bologna, partner of the
project, has developed 30 Learning Units (LUs) about Physical Activity, Sleep
and Nutrition to be integrated in the school program by teachers. Methods A
group of 17 teachers (15 females and 2 males, mean SD age 49,5 ±11,6) from
primary and secondary schools located in Bologna province (Italy) took part in
semi-structured focus groups (FGs). The investigation focused on
facilitators/barriers of the intervention and possible solutions, identifying
time frames and locations, suggestions for engaging the different stakeholders
(teachers, students and families). All FGs were recorded, transcribed,
anonymized, and analyzed through inductive thematic analysis. Results 30 LUs
were created based on the latest scientific evidence and the FGs output. Each LU
addresses a specific topic and is tailored differently for primary and secondary
school. The layout includes an investigation on the topic, classroom activities,
and a section about “healthy homework” or “challenges” to be accomplished at
home, engaging families in the construction of a healthy routine. All the
activities were designed to be feasible and sustainable. Each LU includes a
discussion phase to understand students’ feedback about proposed homework and
learning content. Conclusions FGs have proven crucial to tailoring LUs on the
needs of different stakeholders and co-designing an effective intervention.
“Healthy homework” and “Challenges” encourage students to pursue healthy habits
also outside the school setting, involving families. Feedback on the activity
provides an insight into the progression and effectiveness of the intervention.
Key messages • The EUmove project integrates knowledge about sleeping,
nutritional and physical activity habits into the school curriculum to promote
healthy lifestyles among students and their families. • Thanks to the FGs, LUs
are designed to suit the target audience. LUs integration into school curricula
is therefore a feasible intervention, not requiring specialized personnel to be
implemented.
