Title: NON - PARAMETRIC MULTIPLE INPUTS PREDICTION MODEL FOR QUANTITY OF INFANT-FORMULA DEMANDED FOR CHILDREN AGED 0 - 24 MONTHS IN ILORIN-SOUTH, NIGERIA
Authors: Jumoke Popoola, Olusola Samuel Makinde, Adagba Victor Ukerchia
ID: openalex.W4319151241
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.33003/fjs-2022-0604-1007

Infant-formula is recommended by the World Health Organisation as the safest
form of complementary food to human breast milk. Breastfeeding duration and
other imperative input-factors that govern quantity of infant-formula demanded
(a modulus variable) is difficult to model and predict with high precision.
However, infants based on their conventional rights have to be given good
nutrition. This study is necessitated by the challenging process of complex
modulus prediction of quantity of infant-formula demanded to complement human
breast milk, which may be attributed to differences in maternal characteristics
at various maternal geographical settlement areas. Owning to complex nature of
the differences, we propose a data-driven approach for handling larger-scale
scenarios which may be limited in the conventional parametric modelling methods.
This study aims at investigating the association of maternal characteristics
with quantity of infant -formula demanded among breastfeeding mothers who have
children aged 0 – 24 months in Ilorin-South Local Government Area, Nigeria.
Primary data were collected from 744 breastfeeding mothers. We adopted
appropriate non-parametric tests to determine the impact of different
independent groups of maternal covariate factors considered on quantity of
infant -formula demanded. Multi-associations were assessed and negative binomial
model was formulated to predict estimated quantity of infant-formula demanded
for various breastfeeding durations. The results show that increase in
breastfeeding duration leads to increase in quantity of infant-formula demanded.
In future intervention studies, factors that have significant effect on demand
for infant-formula might be considered for proper monitoring of infant feeding.
