Title: The Benefits of Infusing the Arts in a College Preparatory Program
Authors: Catherine M. Millett, Marisol J. C. Kevelson, Zitsi Mirakhur
ID: openalex.W4229066944
URL: https://doi.org/10.21977/d917148321

An extensive body of work has demonstrated the benefits of participating in the
arts, including when it is integrated into other disciplines, for young adults.
In addition, this work highlights the likely advantages of engagement with the
arts for students from low-income backgrounds as they transition into elite
postsecondary institutions. Such findings have shaped the organization of the
Princeton University Preparatory Program (PUPP), a rigorous academic and
cultural enrichment program which supports high-achieving, low-income public
high school students, from the communities surrounding campus, prepare for
admission to and success at selective colleges and universities. More
specifically, PUPP provides its scholars with a studio art course during each of
their three summers in the program and school-year trips to performances and
museums. During their time in PUPP, scholars attend approximately 21 live
performances and visit at least six different art museums.In this paper, we add
to the literature on art integration by examining whether, and how, the views of
PUPP scholars on the arts programming they receive change over their time in the
program. We also assess the PUPP alumni’s perceptions of the extent to which
PUPP’s art and cultural activities influenced them. Taken together, these
analyses of survey data help us understand whether there are differences in
student views by the amount of art programming they receive (“dosage”) and if
there are sustained benefits of the arts integration and programming PUPP
students receive (“fade-out”). We supplement this quantitative data with
information from focus groups with a variety of stakeholders.Although our
quantitative analyses of survey data revealed no dosage or fade-out effects, our
interview data highlighted the cumulative development of art skills and
knowledge over time and confirmed that the program’s arts and cultural
activities provided contextual information and experiences useful for PUPP
alumni in college. Along with prior work that shows PUPP scholars’
overwhelmingly positive views of the arts programing, these&nbsp; findings point
to the benefits of university-led college access programs that provide arts and
cultural exposure for students’ social and cultural capital and college
preparation.
