Title: Depression, anxiety and stress among high school students: A cross-sectional study in an urban municipality of Kathmandu, Nepal
Authors: Anita Karki, Bipin Thapa, Pranil Man Singh Pradhan, Prem Basel
ID: openalex.W4281706923
URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0000516

Depression and anxiety are the most widely recognized mental issues affecting
youths. It is extremely important to investigate the burden and associated risk
factors of these common mental disorders to combat them. Therefore, this study
was undertaken with the aim to estimate the prevalence and identify factors
associated with depression, anxiety, and stress among high school students in an
urban municipality of Kathmandu, Nepal. A cross-sectional study was conducted
among 453 students of five randomly selected high schools in Tokha Municipality
of Kathmandu. Previously validated Nepali version of depression, anxiety, and
stress scale (DASS-21) was used to assess the level of symptoms of depression,
anxiety and stress (DAS). Multivariable logistic regression was carried out to
decide statistically significant variables of symptoms of DAS at p-value<0.05.
The overall prevalence of DAS was found to be 56.5% (95% CI: 51.8%, 61.1%),
55.6% (95%CI: 50.9%, 60.2%) and 32.9% (95%CI: 28.6%, 37.4%) respectively. In the
multivariable model, nuclear family type, students from science or humanities
faculty, presence of perceived academic stress, and being electronically bullied
were found to be significantly associated with depression. Female sex, having
mother with no formal education, students from science or humanities faculty and
presence of perceived academic stress were significantly associated with
anxiety. Likewise, female sex, currently living without parents, and presence of
perceived academic stress were significantly associated with stress. Prevention
and control activities such as school-based counseling services focusing to
reduce and manage academic stress and electronic bullying are recommended in
considering the findings of this research.
