Title: Is Attachment Theory the Answer to a Complex Healthcare System?
Authors: Alberto Salmoiraghi, Amy Kerti
ID: openalex.W4283168365
URL: https://doi.org/10.1192/bjo.2022.337

Aims This article proposes the need for a theoretical framework that can be
applied to underpin the varied idiosyncratic mental health systems. Methods
Bowlby's Attachment Theory defines a set of values that are required for a
developing child to acquire a stable base which allow for healthy psychological
development into adulthood. These values and behaviours may serve as a caring
and holistic framework for people using mental health services. Results The
outcomes in mental health remain unsatisfactory and services are overall
fragmented and increasingly specialised. Ongoing recognition of the inter-
related relationship between a person's immediate and social environment and
their mental health are frequently overlooked as services become ever stretched
in terms of finances, capacity and limited resources including support for
staff. The emphasis of treatment is on illness instead of the multifactorial
humanity of the individuals using the services. A key outcome of mental health
provision is recovery but instead, recovery is compromised by a reductive
approach to care that may paradoxically compromise rights, autonomy, confidence
and self-belief when people are at their most vulnerable. This creates feelings
of mistrust, uncertainty and a limited sense of safety toward services.
Attachment theory takes into account the individual, their experiences, their
social world and the significant people in their lives. The principles required
for the developing child to develop a secure attachment from a stable base are
similar to those required for people experiencing mental illness to facilitate
recovery and develop resilience to help manage and reduce episodes of relapse.
Systems that work well, frequently exhibit values underlying models of care that
include continuity, consistency, respect, safety, autonomy, human rights,
freedom, supportive, trusting relationships and collaboration. The opposite of
that seen in what presents as autocratic and risk-averse approaches of many
mental health services. The principles required to enable a child to develop
into a psychologically well-adjusted adult are similar to those required when a
person is at their most vulnerable. Episodes of mental illness can be a time for
reflection and growth, with the right care and therapeutic intervention, illness
can also be a time to learn and develop skills for greater resilience in future.
Conclusion This paper outlines the implications and cultural changes that are
required so that the principles of attachment theory can serve as a theoretical
framework across mental health services to provide a stable base for people
using the services and staff providing the care.
