Title: Navigating And Negotiating Identity In The Black Gay Mecca: Educational And Institutional Influences That Positively Impact The Life Histories Of Black Gay Male Youth In Atlanta
Authors: Michael D. Bartone
ID: openalex.W777225496
URL: https://scholarworks.gsu.edu/eps_diss/118

Sexual minority people face a heterosexist society in which they are legally and
socially marginalized. Additionally, Black people face a society where racist
attitudes and laws persist, one in which they are dehumanized as "other" in
relation to Whites. Furthermore, being a Black male means confronting a system
where, beginning in elementary school, one is frequently deemed deficient or
deviant and penalized by racist practices and policies. Very few studies have
examined how Black gay males come to understand their intersecting racial and
sexual identities or how they navigate and negotiate life in a White
heterosexist society. This dissertation outlines the current state of sexual
minority youth with a focus on Black gay males and suggests that more must be
done to understand the lived experiences of this community within and beyond the
schoolhouse, especially in a city such as Atlanta, which is known as a Black gay
mecca and where the Black sexual minority community is visible. It is important
to examine how a range of institutional forces, working in tandem with and
sometimes against racism and heterosexism, challenge as well as assist Black gay
males in forming their identities. The purpose of the study was to gather the
life histories of five young Black sexual minority males aged 19-24 in metro-
Atlanta. I utilized critical race theory and quare theory, which critique
endemic racism and heteronormativity, as a lens to understand their life
histories within a larger societal context. By probing how numerous social
institutions have influenced young Black male identity formation, including
schools, peers, family, church, community-based LGBTQ organizations, and social
media, this study presents life histories in a way that provides a more holistic
picture of this community. Due to the paucity of research focused on how young
Black gay males are productively navigating through life, this study offers a
distinct contribution by placing their histories front and center in an attempt
to provide a counterstory to deficit-based perspectives. From the participants?
life histories, five factors were found to shape identity formation while
navigating the above institutions: racial shelving (bracketing race in majority-
Black environments to contend with sexual identity issues); thick skin
(increasing ability to face and conquer challenges based on negotiation of past
challenges); self-determination (taking the initiative to seek information and
relationships to learn about sexual identity, including use of social media);
defying/transcending stereotypes (refusing to conform to dominant narratives
about Black gay males); and experiential evolution (understanding that
experience translates into growth and self-affirmation). All of these factors
address the ways in which the participants have come to understand, negotiate,
accept, and even embrace their intersecting identities. Additionally, findings
are useful because the participants? life histories have set a foundation for
how educators and sexual majority youth can better understand a population
facing a racist and heterosexist society and enable new policy interventions to
be imagined. Four proposals, which emanate from participants' life experiences,
are presented for schools to undertake: incorporating Black gay activists and
community members into school culture, providing professional development for
teachers on race and heterosexism, developing a comprehensive sex-education
curriculum that includes gay students, and implementing a ?Who Cares? campaign
to mediate peer pressure to conform.
