Title: Insatisfação corporal e bullying entre escolares de baixo peso do Brasil e Portugal
Authors: Marcela Almeida Zequinão, Pâmella de Medeiros, Wanderlei Abadio de Oliveira, Manoel Antônio dos Santos, Luís Lopes
ID: openalex.W4283739943
URL: https://doi.org/10.36311/jhgd.v32.9943

Introduction: the body image is constituted by psychic and cultural aspects
elaborated by the subject. It results in satisfaction or dissatisfaction, which
can be promoted or intensified by peer pressure on ideals of body image.
Objective: to compare the prevalence rates of body dissatisfaction between
Brazilians and Portuguese underweight, and to analyze the association of this
variable with the social context, nutritional status and participation in
bullying situations. Methods: 720 students from both countries (377 girls; M =
10 years old), from five public schools and three private schools participated
in this research. Participants answered the following instruments:
Sociodemographic Questionnaire; Body Silhouettes Scale and Bullying
Questionnaire. Body mass and height were also measured. The data were analyzed
statistically. Results: in relation to dissatisfaction with thinness, the
participants in the private education network presented 0.43 (95% CI =
0.25-0.72) times less likely to manifest this condition when compared to the
participants in the public education network. Boys were 1.64 (95% CI =
1.08-2.50) times more likely to present the outcome of dissatisfaction than
girls. Among the bully-victim, 3.67 (95% CI = 1.41-9.53) times more chances were
observed when compared with those who did not participate in bullying
situations. The data revealed that body satisfaction was similar among students
from both countries, but differed in some aspects of context. It was found that
children and adolescents with low weight also need attention in relation to body
dissatisfaction, mainly due to the identification of this variable as a possible
risk factor associated with bully-victims. Conclusion: interventional actions
can be subsidized by the results presented to prevent and combat both body
dissatisfaction and school bullying.
