Title: Development of the idea of patriotic education of students through school songs in China
Authors: И. С. Бессарабова, Tse Liu
ID: openalex.W4297313029
URL: https://doi.org/10.18413/2313-8971-2022-8-3-0-3

Introduction. The relevance of the study is determined by the increasing need
for patriotic education of young people in modern Chinese society. In this
regard, vocal art, as well as the genre of school songs, in particular, have a
powerful pedagogical potential. Purpose: identification of the features of the
development of the idea of patriotic education of students through school songs
in China (1920s to the present century). Materials and methods: the theoretical
basis of the study was the works of outstanding Chinese composers and teachers
of the 20th century on the role of music and song in the patriotic education of
young people. The research methods included the retrospective analysis of the
issues of patriotic education in China; the theoretical and comparative analysis
of the approaches of Chinese scientists to the implementation of the process of
patriotic education in music lessons at school. Results: The periodization of
the formation of the school song genre, which laid the foundation for the idea
of educating patriots through songs during school music lessons in China, is
presented. The results of comparative analysis of the works of Chinese
researchers have shown that the idea of patriotic education has evolved within
this genre throughout the twentieth century, reflecting the main events in the
history of Chinese society. The features of the school song of the first half of
the twentieth century related to military themes aimed at educating defenders of
the Motherland are highlighted. The characteristic of the stages of updating the
themes of school songs after the formation of the PRC is given. Since 1949,
school songs have been dominated by pictures of peaceful life, praising the
beauty of native nature, family values, labor feat, without losing their
patriotic character. Conclusion. The idea of patriotic education through school
songs in China has evolutionary nature. Despite the difference in themes, all
songs of this genre have patriotic orientation and contribute to the education
of citizens who are sincerely devoted to their native country.
