Title: Adult Reflections on a High School Choral Music Program: Perceptions of Meaning and Lifelong Influence
Authors: Melissa Tyson Arasi
ID: openalex.W161321669
URL: https://scholarworks.gsu.edu/msit_diss/8

The purpose of this study was to investigate the lifelong meaning and influence
of participation in a high school choral music program. This study described and
analyzed the reflections of adults who participated in one high school choral
program selected by the researcher as meeting high standards of practice in
choral music. The eight participants, who were involved in the choral program
for at least three years and pursued careers in fields other than music, were
selected via criterion sampling and interviewed regarding their experiences in
chorus and how those experiences may have influenced their lives. Semi-
structured interviews were the primary method of investigation in this case
study. The first interview began with a broad-scope, grand-tour question. Prior
to the second interview, former-student participants reviewed transcriptions of
the first interview. The second interview consisted of specific questioning
around the possible lifelong influence of their choral experience. During the
second interview, each former-student participant was asked to complete an
evaluation survey of effective teaching strategies/dimensions based on their
memories of their choral director. The data collection process took place over a
period of approximately five months. The school?s choral director was observed
to verify teaching strategies consistent with criteria established by the
researcher and to provide contextual data for triangulation of former-student
participant data. Interview data, field notes, and archival information were
coded for analysis by relevant themes and narratives were crafted. Findings
suggested that the lifelong influence of this high school choral program was
related to multiple social aspects, including a sense of pride and achievement,
as well as to the learned ability to critique and evaluate. Participants valued
the high expectations of the choral director and the exposure to many genres of
music. Data revealed that some self-perceived outcomes of the program, such as
critical thinking and self-confidence, were influential in the development of
lifelong learning skills. Findings implied that traditional performing ensembles
in secondary schools may not provide the greatest opportunity for engaging
school musical experiences that encourage lifelong involvement in music.
Additionally, the findings revealed that extra-musical benefits of the program
outweighed the musical influence in adulthood.
