Title: Breastfeeding Practices (Initiation, Exclusivity, Duration) During the First Six Months of an Infant’s Life among Caesarean Mothers in Selangor
Authors: Nor Hazirah Amalina Che Hussain, HuiJun Chih, Syahrul Bariah Abdul Hamid
ID: openalex.W4320063278
URL: http://doi.org/10.47836/mjmhs.18.s15.11

Introduction: During the first six months of an infant’s life, breastfeeding
practices are essential for an infant’s growth as recommended by the World
Health Organisation (WHO). Breastfeeding also helps to strengthen the bond
between mother and child. In accordance with this, infants can obtain optimal
nutrition through initiation, exclusivity, and optimal duration of breastfeeding
practices. However, it is shown that a mother who undergoes caesarean delivery
has higher chances to experience difficulties in breastfeeding than vaginal
delivery mothers. Therefore, this study is aimed to determine the prevalence of
breastfeeding practices among caesarean mothers during the first six months
after delivery. Methods: This cross-sectional study was conducted in chosen
government Health Clinics in Selangor from July to December 2021. A total of 424
mothers were recruited, and data on socio-demographic and breastfeeding
practices were obtained. Results: In the first six months after birth, 50.9% of
caesarean mothers exclusively breastfed their infants, and the prevalence of
breastfeeding practices was 37%. Approximately 55.9% of mothers initiated
breastfeeding between one and 24 hours, while 31.1% and 13.0% initiated
breastfeeding within one hour and after 24 hours, respectively. Breastfeeding
initiation is found to have a significant effect on the duration of
breastfeeding (χ2(4)=9.751,p-value=.045) while, breastfeeding exclusivity is
found significantly dependent on the time of breastfeeding initiation and
duration, (χ2(4)=11.88, p-value&lt;.05). Conclusion: From these findings,
breastfeeding exclusivity is influenced by early initiation and predicts a
longer duration of breastfeeding. Therefore, breastfeeding support during early
postpartum from family members and healthcare providers are important in
predicting positive breastfeeding outcomes.
