Title: walter benjamin: “infância, uma experiência devastadora”
Authors: Anelise Monteiro do Nascimento
ID: openalex.W4308432107
URL: https://doi.org/10.12957/childphilo.2022.67323

Built on the dialogue between the processes of institutionalization of childhood
and educational practices, this article considers data from a research project
that aimed to gather knowledge of the experience of childhood in early childhood
education (ECE) settings. The empirical basis of our study is a collection of
observational fieldnotes gathered in 21 public ECE institutions that serve the
city of Rio de Janeiro. In order to understand children’s experience in these
settings, our theoretical framework is supported by a reading of Walter
Benjamin's philosophy of childhood, by sources in the sociology and anthropology
of childhood, and through an analysis of the political contexts that influence
the practices of institutionalizing young children. The quote adopted in this
text represents the results of a comparison between the speech and interactions
of the children in the schools participating in the research and textual
fragments from Benjamin’s “Obras Escolhidas I e II.” We drew on the concept of
childhood experience present in the work of this philosopher in order to explore
how children experience their childhood within the context of the school
environment. When thinking about childhood through the lens of children’s
experience, we draw on the legacy attributed by Benjamin to Kant's work on the
concept of experience itself. Here, the latter is understood, not just as an
event, but as something that unites/brings us together through the intersection
of generation, history, and narrative. Regardless of the format of children's
institutionalization–that is, whether they attend daycare centers, exclusive
early ECE settings, schools or elementary schools that have preschool
classes–based on our reading the fieldnotes we conclude that the experience of
childhood takes place in the context of relationships with others, with objects,
with culture, with society and with nature. Our research showed that, like the
child as characterized in the work of Benjamin, the children of our day care
centers and schools are attracted by what he calls “debris”and what the latter
present to them as possibilities for action. They do not directly reproduce the
world of adults; rather, they establish a new relationship with what the world
offers them, which is not exactly coherent with that world. What children
produce in their interactions is the result of a refined process in which
collective and individual experience intersect, with culture as a meeting point.
