Title: Case Study Involving Art Integration Supports Social Studies Content Learning and Creativity
Authors: Ksenia S. Zhbanova, Audrey C. Rule
ID: openalex.W4229076472
URL: https://doi.org/10.21977/d917149457

Arts integration with core subjects has been recognized as improving academic
achievement. The current study investigated the mechanisms / principles
supporting success by examining artist-reported thoughts during an art-
integrated social studies project in which the artist created a diorama about a
Native American tribe’s use of corn. The research questions centered on these
issues: the ways corn was depicted in the artwork, types of themes emerging from
the data, types of interactions present, processes occurring when art and social
studies inquiry are combined, and aspects of creativity theory occurring in the
final artwork and data. The data for this case study were collected over four
months during the creation of the artwork, and consisted of notes of the artist
regarding questions, thoughts, feelings, and decisions while working on the art
piece. The diorama showcased various scenes of corn’s place in Hopi society such
as courtship during corn grinding, corn kachina dancers, perfect “mother” and
“father” ears of corn for a newborn, corn petroglyphs, and a small cornfield
near a stream. These data were explored by thematic analysis using the constant
comparison method, techniques common in art research. Thematic analysis yielded
seventeen themes and sixty subthemes, including the finding, from interaction
analysis, that artistic inquiry facilitated and guided social studies inquiry
and vice-versa. These art-facilitated interactions resulted in new social
studies content learning by the artist, along with facilitation of creativity.
Data statements showed support for fluency, flexibility, originality, and
elaboration; Torrance’s creative strengths; Piirto’s Seven I’s of Creativity;
and Csikszentmihalyi’s flow. Art-driven social studies inquiry could be used by
social studies teachers as a motivating educational tool to increase content
learning while encouraging students to increase their creativity. Art education
can be recognized as an integral partner of social studies. This concrete
example not only showed increased motivation and content learning but improved
creativity.
