Title: Animation Narrative on Stress Relief and Psychological Cognitive Development in Adolescents
Authors: Qian Jiang, Ma Li, Min Yue
ID: openalex.W4294534773
URL: https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/1111488

As the atmosphere of domestic animation is getting stronger and stronger in
recent years, its proportion in the process of public aesthetics, entertainment,
and consumption is increasing; thus, the relationship between the audience and
works has become an important academic focus. The theatrical animation in the
animation industry has become the category that needs to be focused on and
changed in the development process of domestic animation because of its
characteristics of receiving attention from all-age audiences. Because of the
diversified audience levels faced by theatrical animation, it is particularly
difficult to coordinate the needs of each audience level, coupled with the long-
term influence of Japanese and American animation; the trend of pop culture led
by network culture; the inheritance, excavation, and reconstruction of national
culture; and other cultural environment and creative thinking intertwined,
making the construction of the independence of domestic animation appear more
and more difficult. The purpose of this paper is to analyze the theoretical
study of the healing elements of Natsume Yojimbo and to analyze the creation of
Chinese traditional ink and wash in the creation of our own works. It is
concluded that the thematic choices are based on two categories: emotions and
dreams, which focus on personal life experience and universal concern for human
life. The character construction is divided into three aspects: self-resistance
and self-reflection, self-vision and self-actualization, and traumatic
experience and self-rescue to explain the complexity and diversity of the
characters' growth connotation. The narrative perspective constitutes the
perspective from which the issues are viewed. The omniscient perspective allows
for the coexistence of complex character relationships and a clear storyline,
while the limited perspective reveals certain emotional tendencies. The
narrative mode presents the moral of the text with cause-and-effect narrative,
embellished group narrative, and dreamlike polyphony narrative. Finally, the
article discusses the realistic dilemma of the growth narrative of domestic
online animation and tries to put forward feasible development suggestions in
response to the problems at this stage.
