Title: How Has Gamification Within Digital Platforms Affected Self-Regulated Learning Skills During the COVID-19 Pandemic? Mixed-Methods Research
Authors: Waleed Salim Alhalafawy, Marwa Zaki
ID: openalex.W4220958119
URL: https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v17i06.28885

Gamification systems on digital platforms are among the essential systems that
can motivate learners towards achieving educational gains and goals. Self-
regulated learning skills (SRLS) have become one of the most important learning
requirements in the COVID-19 pandemic context so that the learner can plan and
manage their learning tasks. The current research examines the impact of using
Digital Platform Based Gamification (DPBG) on SRLS during the pandemic. A
blended research approach based on a combination of quantitative and qualitative
approaches was used to better understand the impact of gamification on digital
platforms for SRLS during the pandemic. The descriptive approach was used to
analyze the previous literature and develop SRLS. The quasi-experimental
approach was used to compare the first experimental group that used the DPBG
(G1-DPBG) and the second experimental group that used the same Digital Platform
without Gamification (DPWG) (G2-DPWG). The phenomenological approach was used to
gain a better understanding of how gamification affects SRLS. The research
sample in the quantitative study consisted of 60 students from the tenth-grade
students in Jeddah who were randomly distributed to the two research groups. The
participants in the qualitative research were eight students who were
intentionally selected from students who use gamification. A scale of SRLS was
developed that included four themes: Goal Setting and Planning, Monitoring,
Rehearsing and Memorizing, and Seeking Social Assistance with a total of 28
items. A qualitative tool was developed that includes a set of open-ended
questions for semi-structured interviews that were carried out after completing
all quantitative data collection. The quantitative results demonstrated the
superiority of gamification via digital platforms in developing SRLS. The
outputs of the objective analysis of the qualitative data also provided more in-
depth explanations and insights from the students’ perspective on the role of
DPBG in enhancing SRLS during the COVID-19 pandemic.
