Title: Characteristics and Etiology of Moderate-to-Severe Diarrhea of Acute, Prolonged Acute, and Persistent Duration among Children Less than 5 Years Old in Rural Western Kenya, 2008-2010
Authors: Katharine A. Schilling
ID: openalex.W53647187
URL: https://scholarworks.gsu.edu/iph_theses/146

Worldwide, diarrheal disease is the second leading cause of death in children
under 5 years old. Data on diarrhea of extended duration is limited. We
described the characteristics associated with acute, prolonged acute and
persistent diarrhea in Kenyan children less than 5 years of age participating in
the Global Enterics Multicenter Study. Children presenting at a clinic were
enrolled if they met the case definition for acute moderate-to-severe diarrhea
defined as >3 loose stools in the last 24 hrs, within 7 days of illness onset,
with >1 of the following: sunken eyes, skin tenting, dysentery, IV rehydration,
or hospitalization. To determine diarrhea duration, the child’s caretaker was
asked to recall the number of days the child had diarrhea in the 7 days pre-
enrollment, and to record each day of diarrhea post-enrollment on a form for 14
days. Stool specimens were collected at enrollment, and the post-enrollment form
was collected during a home visit. We defined acute diarrhea (AD) as <6
days>duration, prolonged acute diarrhea (ProD) as 7-13 days, and persistent
diarrhea (PD) as >14 days. From January 31, 2008 to January 24, 2010, 557
children with acute moderate-to-severe diarrhea were enrolled. Using the
Wilcoxon rank-sum test, Kruskal-Wallis test, and Cox Proportional Hazards Model
we examined the relationship between the duration of diarrhea by gender, age,
and various etiologic agents. We found no association between gender and the
duration of diarrhea. Age was associated with diarrhea of extended duration;
children less than or equal to 11 months of age were 1.3 times more likely to
experience diarrhea of longer duration than their counterparts. We found
Cryptosporidium to be more associated with ProAD and PD. Children infected with
Cryptosporidium were 1.5 to 1.7 times more likely to have diarrhea with a longer
duration than their counterparts. Based on these results, interventions related
to diarrhea and diarrhea of extended duration should focus more closely on young
children, especially children less than 24 months of age.
