Title: Constructing Arabic as Heritage: Investment in Language, Literacy, and Identity among Young U.S. Learners
Authors: Amanda Lanier Temples
ID: openalex.W2120481306
URL: https://scholarworks.gsu.edu/alesl_diss/25

The numbers of learners studying Arabic in the U.S. have increased more than any
other language over the last ten years. As a critical language, important for
strategic political and economic reasons, Arabic has received considerable
support from the Departments of State and Education (Jackson & Malone, 2009;
Wiley, 2007). However, Arabic is also a prominent heritage language, important
for cultural and interpersonal reasons to the families and communities who speak
it and for whom it is a binding force (Fishman, 2001; Van Deusen-Scholl, 2003).
Nevertheless, research on learners of Arabic and their learning processes is
still very limited. Existing studies have compared Arabic heritage learners?
motivation and the structure of their language knowledge with that of non-HLLs
(Husseinali, 2006; Benmamoun, Montrul, & Polinsky, 2010), but HLL research has
hardly addressed the complex social and cultural influences on their learning
processes (He, 2010; Montrul, 2010). Drawing on investment in language learning
(Norton Peirce, 1995; Norton, 2000) as a theoretical lens, this study asks how
learners and their families construct Arabic as heritage and its implications
for their beliefs and practices. Focusing on students in a public charter middle
school in the southeast U.S. who are studying Arabic as a foreign language, this
study seeks to bring together language learning, identity construction, and the
challenges and implications of biliteracy for Arabic learners from a range of
backgrounds in an effort to understand the complexity of the Arabic learning
process. To that end, it uses ethnographic methods including interviews with
five focal families, class observations, and surveys and strives for grounded
theory. In constructing heritage, each learner and family, from a range of
national and cultural backgrounds, must balance priorities regarding the
multiple varieties of Arabic, religious literacy, and the role of Arabic in
local and global contexts. Results should shed light on the role of social
context in language and literacy development for Arabic and comparable LCTLs,
contribute to theory regarding the relationship between identity construction
and language learning for heritage learners, and suggest approaches to
supporting young learners of critical and heritage languages to promote a more
multilingual society.
