Title: Digital inclusion and participation of people with intellectual disabilities during <scp>COVID</scp>‐19: A rapid review and international bricolage
Authors: Darren Chadwick, Kristin Alfredsson Ågren, Sue Caton, Esther Chiner, Joanne Danker
ID: openalex.W4213047227
URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/jppi.12410

Abstract The COVID‐19 pandemic has meant a rapid transfer of everyday activities
to the online world. Information and communication technologies (ICTs) have
become more embedded than ever in people's lives. This investigation addresses
how this change has affected the lives of people with intellectual disabilities
(ID). A two‐step design was used. A rapid review was conducted on empirical
studies published between January 2019 and June 2021. Search terms related to
ID, ICT use and COVID‐19. A qualitative international bricolage was also
conducted corresponding to author nationalities. Data gathered from the review
and bricolage were analysed separately using thematic analysis and relationally
synthesised. Digital solutions to provide access to COVID‐19 information and
guidance seemed inadequate but were seldom empirically studied. Digital poverty,
literacy and exclusion remain significant issues for people with ID
internationally. People and their carers experienced reduced and removed service
provision, loneliness and impoverished daily lives during the pandemic;
amelioration of which was facilitated by digital solutions. One solution often
used was videoconferencing. Prior experience of digital participation, adequate
finances, connection, support and digital literacy mentoring for both people
with ID and those providing services and support facilitated digital inclusion.
Digital exclusion during COVID‐19 was exacerbated by sociopolitical, structural,
individual and support‐related barriers. Although awareness of digital exclusion
appears to have been raised, the extent to which this has led to action and
change remains unclear. Despite digital exclusion and digital participation
benefitting continuation of life, social and emotional well‐being and autonomy,
COVID‐19 has not provided the impetus to eradicate digital poverty for people
with ID. Governmental support, digital education, creativity and problem solving
are required to enable people with ID the human right to be included in the
digital world at this essential time and into the future.
