Title: As ações de formação continuada de professores da educação infantil, na perspectiva da inclusão, na rede municipal de ensino de Uberlândia, de 2008 a 2020
Authors: Leiliane Rodrigues
ID: openalex.W4297224776
URL: https://doi.org/10.14393/ufu.di.2022.5332

School education in Brazil has been changing in recent years. A significant
change refers to the care of young children in the Special Education public,
welcoming their differences and potential in common educational institutions. In
this sense, this research reflects on the need for continuing education and aims
to present the continuing education actions of Early Childhood Education
teachers developed in the RME of Uberlândia that refer to Inclusive Education in
the period from 2008 to 2020. qualitative and exploratory, with data collection
through bibliographic research, with reference to the publications of Skliar
(2003), Kuhlmann Jr (2015), Imbernón (2010), Nóvoa (2009, 2022), Gatti et al.
(2019) and in documental research carried out in the internal archives of the
Julieta Diniz Municipal Center for Educational Studies and Projects (Cemepe).
The study and discussion of data took place through content analysis by Bardin
(1977). This study is relevant in the sense of reflecting on the importance of
continuing education offered to professionals, as a significant measure to
promote inclusive education in Early Childhood Education. The survey of
educational legislation and Cemepe's internal documents made it possible to
gather data on the problem and identify that there were some proposals for
continuing education for professionals in Early Childhood Education in the
Municipal Network. However, in the training proposals between 2008 and 2020
there was a minimal approach to topics related to the inclusion of children in
the Special Education public. In the analysis, the recording units were
organized into three categories: 1) Governmentality in action, which was
subdivided into three sub-items: a) work skills; b) willingness to self-
train/update and c) search for innovative practices; 2) Control over teaching
thinking and acting, in which three groups of authors were organized based on:
a) critical/reflective; b) psychology and c) practitioners; and 3) Between the
norm and reality, grouping in which the concepts of disability and special
education were focused on the perspectives of; a) clinical view; b)
developmental vision and c) Socio-anthropological. The Analysis showed: a) the
concern with the development/training to work with children in the special
education public – made invisible; b) the centrality of the epistemological
basis of psychology in training; c) the subjection and subjectivation of
teachers via a fragmented training process - each one in his own little box
(dialogue with the same peers, partial view of the whole - causes the mechanical
reproduction of the same movement; d) the government of the teacher's action by
practical training, fragmented and not very critical/reflective; and e) the
exercise of biopower and biopolitics through a training proposal centered on a
psychological perspective, with little focus on other aspects of human
development such as social, political, cultural and economic. Still, it was
latent that there are difficulties in the articulation of the training
activities of the teachers of the common classes and the teachers of the
Specialized Educational Assistance, to promote the inclusion of all children in
the Early Childhood Education institutions. It is noteworthy that the topic
still lacks further research and, therefore, this study, in question, may
contribute to further investigations.
