Title: Research Into improved Distance Learning Using VR Technology
Authors: Pengfei Li, Zelong Fang, Tan Jiang
ID: openalex.W4211233496
URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/feduc.2022.757874

Practical skill-based education requires exemplary face-to-face operational
teaching, and VR can enhance online distance learning, facilitating an
alternative form of “face-to-face” teaching, which results in better
teacher–student communication and learner self-efficacy. It also constitutes as
a useful substitute for in-person teaching, and it also has a positive impact on
learning effectiveness. In this study, a mixed-method approach was used, which
utilized the following methodologies: a combination of quantitative and
qualitative measures, document collection, case and comparative analysis, and VR
teaching that utilizes “You, Calligrapher” as a survey tool. Teachers and
students of art were selected, who then used an educational VR-based calligraphy
game application for teaching activities. We investigated the impact of virtual
time, space, and technical availability on learners’ understanding, imagination,
and interactivity in VR education, and then we evaluated the positive impact via
learner feedback. Research tools that we utilized consist of comprehension,
imagination, and how feedback motivation scales with effective learning; we have
also used Chinese calligraphy performance tests. The SPSS statistical analysis
software was used for related statistical processing, and α was set to 0.05. The
results of this study indicated that Chinese calligraphy studies in VR time and
space affect students’ understanding and imagination but not their operational
abilities. According to our research, a fundamental difference between
traditional and modern teaching methods is a shift toward the use of VR (and the
internet) in education. Therefore, the focus of this study is on understanding
the impact on practical skills during distance learning and investing the
impacts in order to form an effective approach to the use of VR in education.
