Title: Willful Defiance: The Movement to Dismantle the School-to-Prison Pipeline
Authors: A. David Napier
ID: openalex.W4385303847
URL: https://doi.org/10.17763/1943-5045-92.3.444

During a meeting in the spring of 2011, activist and community organizing
scholar Kavitha Mediratta reportedly saw US Attorney General Eric Holder’s “jaw
literally drop” when he heard the findings from a report on school discipline in
Texas (86). According to this report, almost 60 percent of students, 75 percent
of Black students, and 75 percent of students with special needs had been
suspended at least once in middle or high school. Shortly thereafter, the
federal Departments of Education and Justice formed a joint Supportive School
Discipline Initiative to investigate the state of school discipline across the
country. In 2014 the initiative released a federal guidance package that
included research on how current school discipline practices discriminated by
race and ability and provided resources for how schools could move toward safer,
more supportive school discipline. The federal guidance also included studies
showing the strong correlations between negative academic outcomes and
exclusionary discipline practices like suspensions and expulsions, such as
dropping out of school and increased involvement with the criminal justice
system—a phenomenon called the school-to-prison pipeline (STPP). During his
speech announcing the guidelines, Holder reportedly became the first federal
cabinet official to acknowledge the existence of the STPP and commit to
combating it. Although the term and the problem were new concerns for the
federal administration in the early 2010s, parents, youth, and activists had
been fighting the struggle on a local level for decades. In Willful Defiance:
The Movement to Dismantle the School-to-Prison Pipeline, sociologist Mark Warren
draws on interviews and observations with youth and adult organizers to tell the
history of the movement to end the school-to-prison-pipeline, arguing that this
movement has important lessons for scholars and activists.As a community-engaged
scholar, Warren partnered with the Dignity in Schools Campaign (DSC), one of the
organizations fighting the STPP, to design the study. Over three years and
across the United States, Warren conducted interviews with parents, students,
activists, advocates, and legislators; observed conferences, marches, school
board meetings, and organizing meetings; and analyzed a variety of documents,
including school reports and news accounts. In addition to Willful Defiance,
Warren produced resource toolkits for community groups and published a non-
academic book in 2018 called Lift us up! Don’t push us out!, in which youth and
parent organizers wrote about their own experiences in the movement. Despite
being the more academic of the two books, Willful Defiance is written
accessibly, with minimal academic jargon and a strong focus on participant voice
and storytelling.The first three chapters are geared toward academics. In the
first chapter, Warren provides a racial analysis of the history of the STPP,
from zero tolerance to police presence in schools. This chapter is foundational
to one of the book’s key arguments, that the STPP is a function of white
supremacy and therefore only antiracist organizing can combat it. In the second
chapter, Warren argues that though scholars of social movements and community
organizing often think of community organizing as merely local and social
movements as national, the movement to end the STPP operates on local, state,
and national levels. Building off that idea, the third chapter traces the
national history of the STPP movement, from its initial focus on combating
abusive alternative schooling in Mississippi, to campaigns to stop zero-
tolerance policies, to national wins.In contrast to the first three chapters,
which are informative but maintain a scholarly distance, the remainder of the
book looks at the cruelty of the STPP and the enormous work necessary to fight
it through the stories of the youth and parents most directly harmed by it.
Chapters 4, 5, and 6 focus on the history of the movement in Mississippi, Los
Angeles, and Chicago, respectively. The depth of Warren’s research pays off in
the richness of these chapters, as readers get to know the history of the
movement in each place, hear from multiple generations of activists, and learn
the unique organizing strategies of various groups, all without losing sight of
the people directly impacted. In fact, this book is difficult to read at times
because of the unflinching accounts of how school officials brutalize Black and
brown children.Most impactful is when the organizers tell their own stories and
interpret their experiences. For example, Roslyn Broadnax started inviting other
parents of color to share their stories in her home, which eventually led to the
formation of Community Asset Development Redefining Education (CADRE), a group
that pushed the Los Angeles Unified School District to rewrite its exclusionary
disciplinary policies. Broadnax describes how her dark-skinned nephew was often
the butt of his teacher’s racist jokes about monkeys and gorillas, such as when
he was asked, “Did your parents send you with a banana today?” (123). Recounting
a similar experience, Chicago youth activist Amina Henderson described being
pushed against the wall and choked by a school security guard and how, when she
tried to fight back, she was arrested and suspended from school. Amina became
part of Voices of Youth in Chicago Education (VOYCE), a youth-led organization
that successfully campaigned for a state bill that banned zero-tolerance
policies and promoted restorative justice.Warren complements these stories with
ample quantitative data to illustrate that they are not isolated incidents but
examples of a systemic problem. This blend of quantitative data and personal
stories mirrors a political tactic used by the STPP movement activists when
trying to persuade policy makers. On the one hand, a percentage or number may
seem impersonal until you read about or see the physical harm on a student’s
body or grasp parents’ struggle to both advocate for their child and still go to
work. On the other hand, hearing one negative story may lead some to think that
it’s a case of a bad actor in an otherwise well-intentioned system. Warren’s use
of both statistics from activist and government research and firsthand accounts
from activists’ daily lived experiences is persuasive.In chapters 7 and 8,
Warren describes more recent aspects of the movement. Chapter 7 focuses on
newer, less formal community organizing in places like Dayton, Ohio; Richmond,
Virginia; and Gwinnett County, Georgia. Chapter 8 looks at how the movement has
expanded its focus from just Black boys and zero-tolerance to also include Black
girls and gender-nonconforming students, police-free schools, and restorative
justice.Willful Defiance covers a lot of ground to convincingly provide evidence
for Warren’s arguments around what strategies contributed to the policy and
organizing victories of the movement to end the STPP and what scholars and
activists can learn from those strategies. Warren argues that a core strength of
the movement is its leadership by those directly impacted by the STPP. From Los
Angeles to Chicago to Georgia, parents and youth organizers identify problems;
develop creative solutions; advocate for themselves at local, state, and
national levels; and oversee implementation of new policies. Unlike professional
advocates, these activists can share both research and their own personal
stories to persuade legislators, educators, and justice officials toward change.
As mentioned earlier, another strength of the movement is its explicit racial
analysis, which was a feature of the movement before such analyses were common
in education spaces. The data showed that Black students were disproportionately
affected by the STPP, and activists named a white supremacist system as directly
responsible. Finally, Warren points to the importance of organizing at multiple
levels and how the federal movement to end the STPP was a “nationalizing” of the
local organizing.Although Warren doesn’t focus on stories of the tensions within
the movement, he does acknowledge several main challenges. For example, while
professional advocates have more resources and time to devote to organizing and
may be better connected to policy circles, youth and parents who are most
impacted may find taking on leadership roles difficult. Also, interracial
alliances may balk at Black organizers’ insistence to keep anti-Black racism at
the center of analysis and strategy, and LGBTQ youth or youth with disabilities
might feel marginalized by unaddressed homophobia, transphobia, or ableism in
organizations. Because Warren argues that the leadership of those directly
impacted and the racial analysis were key strengths of the movement to end the
STPP, I wanted Warren to explore these challenges further. For example, in
chapter 3, Warren writes about the disagreements between lawyers and community
activists in the DSC over who should lead the development of the organization’s
Model Code on Education and Dignity, a resource to guide schools toward more
humanizing school discipline. In the end, Warren notes that the DSC agreed to
let activists lead the creation of the document but does not provide detail
about who made this decision, how this tension was negotiated, or what, if any,
negative consequences there were. A deeper exploration of the stories of these
tensions would be a useful resource for activists who are likely to face similar
challenges.That said, Warren’s focus on what worked in the movement is valuable
for scholars and activists, and I particularly appreciated the discussion of the
importance of “deep organizing” (258) —relationship and capacity building,
sustained pressure, political education, learning history, personal and
community healing, and more. Once the STPP was given federal recognition in the
2010s, schools across the country began to shift away from zero-tolerance
policies and toward restorative justice. But just recognizing these relatively
recent national culture and policy shifts ignores the long-term, more localized
deep organizing of the movement that was a necessary foundation for larger-scale
change. Warren’s analysis of the power of deep organizing in the success of the
movement to end the STPP is applicable to other movements that are highly
visible during large mobilizing actions or policy victories but whose deep
organizing may be ignored, such as the fight for police abolition or the
disability justice movement.With its insights into the importance of deep
organizing and into leadership by the most directly impacted, Willful Defiance
is an important history and analysis of a movement that has a profound effect on
US schooling, with much to offer both activists and scholars of community
organizing and social movements.
