Title: The road to an international career: The “Erasmus effect” on resilience, intercultural interactions and cultural intelligence
Authors: Valentina Dolce, Éric Davoine, Sophie Wodociag, Chiara Ghislieri
ID: openalex.W4311274048
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijintrel.2022.101741

This study is part of a framework that views study abroad programs as an
opportunity for experiential and transformative learning. Using a mixed-methods
approach with a quantitative multi-wave study, this research examined the
relationship between cultural intelligence and the internationalism career
anchor – the individual predisposition and desire for international mobility for
work. This study considers the role of resilience and intercultural interactions
as predictors of cultural intelligence. In addition, we examined the
transformative learning process by relating the development of cultural
intelligence to specific critical incidents or critical experiences in
intercultural interactions that can be considered triggers of the learning
process. A sample of 170 outgoing Italian Erasmus students completed a self-
report questionnaire prior to departure and another upon return home. The study
also included a control group (n = 52) consisting of students from the same
university who had not participated in the Erasmus program. The results revealed
the positive value of the Erasmus experience, particularly in terms of
strengthening the internationalism career anchor, cognitive cultural
intelligence and resilience. The results also showed that students’ pre-
departure resilience and intercultural interactions with other international
students from different countries can explain higher levels of cultural
intelligence and the desire to work abroad or take on global work assignments.
No significant change across time was found for the same variables in the
control group. In addition, the critical experiences reported by students
highlighted a strong cognitive and motivational component associated with the
Erasmus program. Some practical implications for higher education are discussed.
