Title: Science and comics: from popularization to the discipline of Comics Studies
Authors: Oksana Hudoshnyk, Оleksandr Krupskyi
ID: openalex.W4311696762
URL: https://doi.org/10.32703/2415-7422-2022-12-2-210-230

Modern scientific communication traditionally uses visual narratives, such as
comics, for education, presentation of scientific achievements to a mass
audience, and as an object of research. The article offers a three-level
characterization of the interaction of comic culture and science in a diachronic
aspect. Attention is focused not only on the chronological stages of these
intersections, the expression of the specifics of the interaction is offered
against the background of scientific and public discussions that accompany the
comics–science dialogue to this day. Within the framework of the first stage
(the appearance and distribution of popular science and educational comics), the
characteristics of comics content necessary for the different genesis are
highlighted: documentary storytelling, educational practices of learning through
drawing, active cooperation with well-known companies and institutions,
informativeness and empathic involvement of the young reader in a heroico-
romantic narrative of scientific discoveries and mastering nature. With the
intensification of interdisciplinary approaches (the second stage), comics are
increasingly involved in presenting scientific results within the most diverse
fields. Comics-based research is becoming an interdisciplinary method and a
widespread practical area with the corresponding formation of scientific tools
(applied comics, data comics), forms of interdisciplinary interaction (graphic
medicine, ethnography, narrative geography, urban comics, comics journalism,
etc.), and scientific publications (“The Comics Grid: Journal of Comics
Scholarship”, “Sequentials”). The national format of comics-based research is
presented on the example of Ukrainian comics projects (historical, feminist
comics). In the genesis of development, Comics Studies have gone from a field of
research to disciplinary definitions. In the creation of the metadiscourse of
the scientific direction (the third stage), the authors focused on scientific
discussions, the formation of academic directions and approaches, and markers of
disciplinary self-identification. Emphasis is placed on the unique phenomenon of
the simultaneous concordance of various stages of the dialogue between comics
and science, on the prolonged replication of successful inventions into modern
experience, and the active testing of known narratives at new levels of a
scientific presentation.
