Title: HİDDEN GEM İN CHRİSTOPHER ROBİN'S JUNGLE THE BİRTH OF WİNNİE THE POOH: A CONTENT ANALYSİS
Authors: Büşra ERGİN, Esra ERGİN, Huriye HAMARAT
ID: openalex.W4312363282
URL: https://doi.org/10.55666/folklor.1143587

The study was carried out in order to examine the suitability of the film
"Goodbye Christopher Robin" about Christopher Robin Milne's biography, which was
determined by the Turkish Radio and Television Corporation (TRT) in the "Family
and Children's Films" category with the recommendations of the critics. In this
research, the movie "Goodbye Christopher Robin"; a) the fact that children spend
most of their time in front of the screen as a habit that is an achievement of
the pandemic period, b) The film, which was screened in cinemas in our country
in 2017, is broadcast in the broadcast zone on television channels, c) In the
context of social learning theory, children's learning by modelling, d) the
content of the film is suitable for children and includes concepts related to
the development of children, for these reasons, it was found appropriate to
analyze this film from a developmental point of view. In this study, which has a
qualitative research design, document analysis technique was used. The film
Goodbye Christopher Robin was evaluated with the Content Evaluation Form for
Children's Programs, which was used as a measurement tool in the study. The form
used has 5 basic sub-dimensions. These; the content of children's programs for
the physical development of children (contents for psychomotor development,
content for the sexual development of the child), the content of children's
programs for the cognitive/perceptual development of children, the content of
children's programs for the social and emotional development of children, the
dimension of other content for the development of the child in children's
programs (violence, modeling, family values, family structure) and is the
content dimension of children's programs for language development of children.
Findings of the evaluation results were presented with descriptive statistics.
It was determined that the content of the analyzed film included more content
for social and emotional development area, followed by the content for the
development of the child, including violence, modeling, family structure, family
values, cognitive/perceptual development area content, language development area
content, content for psychomotor and sexual development areas within the
physical development area, respectively. It was seen that the least amount of
content related to sexual development was included in the film. In addition to
elements such as anger/violence, which we can evaluate negatively, elements of
love that we can express positively are also frequently included in the film. As
a result, it was concluded that Goodbye Christopher Robin is a film that can
have a positive impact on children from an intellectual point of view when
watched purposefully and under adult control.
