Title: Nurturing Black Girl Imagination: Using Portraiture to Disrupt the Omnivisibility of Black Girlhood and to Illuminate Black Girls' Childhoodness, Creativity, and Criticality in Science Learning Spaces
Authors: Amber Davis
ID: openalex.W4286836275
URL: https://hdl.handle.net/2027.42/172682

This study explores how Black girls express their Black girl imagination while
participating in a critical, informal science learning program, Empowering Girls
Through Art &amp; Science, designed to prioritize the positive visibility of
Black girls and promote the critical exploration of scientific histories. The
goal of the research was to identify ways Black girls actualize their Black girl
imaginations through expressions of childhood, criticality, and creativity.
Three questions structured the study: (1) How do adolescent Black girls express
their Black girl imaginations when participating in a critical, informal science
learning space designed with them in mind? (2) What do their expressions of
Black girl imagination reveal about their articulations of self? (3) What do
their expressions of Black girl imagination reveal about their meaning making in
science? The framework for the study is constructed from three theoretical
perspectives—Black girlhood studies, critical race-informed science education,
and afrofuturism. I use Black girlhood studies to acknowledge that Black girls
occupy unique intersections of identities, distinct from Black women, which
yield a unique criticality and creativity. I use two tenets of critical race
theory—colorblind racism and whiteness as property—to acknowledge the ways
Western, Eurocentric approaches to science are exclusionary, and, in response, I
articulate five shifts for revolutionizing science education to center Black
girls. I use afrofuturism to legitimize the Black imagination, expand what is
considered scientific, and redefine how time is conceptualized. The methodology
of portraiture is used to understand how Black girls question the status quo,
take critical stances against injustice, and create change where their voices
are systemically excluded. Findings are presented as visual and narrative
portraits of three focal participants. I draw on program applications, semi-
structured interviews, focus groups, video diaries, participants’ artistic
expressions, and researcher memos. Analysis of the data demonstrates that these
Black girls are thinking deeply and critically about the world. Offering spaces
where Black girls can authentically express their childhoodness, share their
critical perspectives, and communicate creatively allows for the development of
counterstories of Black girls in science learning environments. These
counterstories in the form of portraits present three distinct representations
of Black girls in science. This dissertation offers a layered counterstory—a
combination of multiple counterstories that work together to center marginalized
stories and ways of storytelling across a research process—that allow for the
elevation of Black girl meaning making. This study has important implications
for stakeholders in science education. This study reveals to classroom teachers
that children can navigate across multiple epistemologies of science and hold
the capacity to grapple with science from a variety of perspectives. It confirms
that teacher educators must prioritize moments to unpack preservice teacher
bias, explore Black, Brown, and Indigenous scientific histories, and practice
embedding and facilitating opportunities to learn. Science education scholars
should consider the layered counterstory when seeking to center marginalized
voices and more opportunities to elevate Black girl meaning making is critical.
Narratives that illuminate Black girls’ beauty and brilliance, told from their
perspectives, deserve to be centered and celebrated. My hope is that by
elevating Black girl voice in this dissertation, the fields of science education
take the brilliance and beauty of Black girls as axiomatic and begin to redefine
the structures that currently guide the disciplines to move Black girls from the
margins of science learning to the center.
