Title: Examining the relationship between screen time and achievement motivation in an adolescent population
Authors: Jaiyoun Choi, Jason I. Chen
ID: openalex.W4387217221
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.59720/21-187

During these times of unprecedented technological advancement, digital screens
and devices have become synonymous with 21st-century life. However, such
prevalence comes at a price. Research has shown a multitude of mental and
physical health problems linked to excessive screen time. Although the effects
of screen time have been extensively studied, one area at the core of mental
health among adolescents has had limited examination: motivation, which is the
drive to reach personal goals or to improve oneself. The purpose of this project
was to identify the association between screen habits and achievement
orientation, specifically in the prolific screen-using population of
adolescents, by surveying students attending a large, suburban high school in
Oregon. The survey contained three sections: one involving the Ray-Lynn
Achievement Orientation scale to measure motivation; another asking participants
about screen habits (time spent, devices used, and activities completed); and a
third asking demographics questions. In total, 217 responses were collected.
Using linear multiple regression, both average screen time—excluding
work/school-related tasks—and entertainment-oriented screen time were found to
be associated with lower achievement orientation. Average smartphone,
television, and social media time were found to be smaller predictors of lower
achievement motivation. Additionally, the results showed that all significant
screen habits had negative associations with achievement motivation for
adolescents. Sexual orientation was found to be a significant covariate in the
models. Sources of error include the small sample size and the lack of equal
grade-level representation. Further research could include experimentally
manipulating participants’ screen time to evaluate a causal relationship.
