Title: The psychological impact of the Metaverse
Authors: Patrick Henz
ID: openalex.W4311525337
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s44202-022-00061-3

Abstract The Metaverse is no revolution, but another step in the evolution of
the internet. Today we can observe various 3D virtual worlds with different
focuses and purposes, like meeting spaces, education, or classic gaming. Most of
these applications run on computer or smart phone, some of these 3D platforms
support virtual reality glasses, or even further wearables like haptic gloves.
Nevertheless, the general interconnection of these platforms is still lacking.
Due to this, user information, including avatars, cannot be reused for other
applications. Even if the research company Gartner predicts that already “by
2026, 25% of the people will spend at least 1 h a day in the Metaverse for work,
shopping, education, social and/or entertainment,” the vision still did not
manifest yet. This gives society and academia time to start a productive
discussion. The article wants to support this ambition by first discussing a
potential definition of what the Metaverse will be, including different types
for different purposes. After that this, the text predicts the arrival,
including required circumstances, then later the expected psychologic impact of
the expected scenarios on the regular users. As human psychology depends on
experience, environment and, of course, the contact with other humans, such a
scenario will have a relevant impact, up to a different understanding of
reality, as people frictionless move from physical to virtual world, and even
interact on complete different virtual worlds. Existing articles regarding the
connections between online (like video games and social media) and offline
behavior focused on particular cohorts. As the Metaverse will change work and
private life, wide parts of society are voluntary and non-voluntary affected,
which limits the possibility to transfer the insights from earlier scenarios to
this topic. This article focuses on shifted Socialization, Roles, Perception,
and the relating Humanization of Artificial Intelligence, as it enables the
algorithm, consciously or subconsciously, to influence the human mind. Graphical
Abstract
