Title: Critting the Crit in the Education of Architects: From Bauhaus to Bolton Street
Authors: Patrick Flynn
ID: openalex.W1496131384
URL: https://arrow.dit.ie/ltcdis/6

This investigative study is concerned with examining the current methods of
assessment of architecture students in the system known as the “crit” and the
associated methods of giving students feedback on their designs in a public
forum. The aim of the research is to identify the main weaknesses of the crit
system and to explore alternatives which perhaps would have more sustainable and
transparent methods of assessment and feedback. Personal motivation for the
research sprang from concerns regarding both the effectiveness of the crit from
the pedagogical perspective of student learning and from concerns about it as a
transparent and useful system of assessment for professional architects. Policy
concerns in the research were informed by three immediate issues: an in-house
concern regarding the relatively high number of examination appeals from
architecture students compared to other design degrees which use a crit system,
a national concern, based on the NQAI requirements that modules be expressed in
terms of learning outcomes, and more global concerns for the five year
undergraduate system of training architects in Europe generally arising form the
preference for a three-year plus two-year degree systems manifest in the Bologna
Accord. The research approach locates itself broadly within the postmodernist
critical theory framework which acknowledges the complexity of the issues under
study and the need for both the “distant” and the “close-up”. The research
design is basically “bricolage” which allows for nonlinear exploration of
discrete but related aspects of the study and which facilitates a range of
researcher stances including detached interpreter, insider-intervener and
dialogic commentator. A literature review, pedagogic interventions in class-
based teaching and in-depth interviews with architecture graduates from DIT and
other colleges were used. The research findings show a remarkably similar
experience of architecture education through the crit system with broadly
negative opinions on the value of the crit as a learning experience. The
findings from the class-based interventions indicate that the crit systems which
involves large numbers of students and staff is highly ineffective compared to
small group crits and that the combination of oral and visual assessment
feedback on designs is more effective than the traditional oral feedback system.
The research offers a number of proposals regarding improvements to the crit
system and suggest areas where further research is urgently required to make the
system of assessment more effective and transparent and to ease the training
system for architects toward the inevitable structural changes resulting from
the Bologna Accord.
