Title: Inspiration and Innovation: The Intrinsic Dimension of the Artistic Soul
Authors: Roberta Rosenthal Kwall
ID: openalex.W1540350909
URL: https://scholarship.law.nd.edu/ndlr/vol81/iss5/7

Copyright's provision of economic incentives is completely consistent with its
underlying utilitarian philosophy. A perspective grounded in economic and
conventionally understood utilitarian rationales for legal protection emphasizes
the commodification and dissemination of intellectual works. This perspective
fails to take into account that human enterprise also embodies inspirational or
spiritual motivations for creativity. This failure creates turmoil for many
authors because it fosters a dominant market exchange reality that ignores the
importance of non-economically based motivations for innovation. This Article
demonstrates that narratives illuminating spiritual or inspirational motivations
for innovation are integral to understanding more fully the artistic soul, and
challenges the dialogue on authors' rights in this country to consider the
implications of such narratives. The intrinsic dimension of creativity developed
herein is one characterized by spiritual or inspirational motivations that are
inherent in the creative task itself as opposed to motivation resulting from the
possibility of economic reward. Inspirational motivations for artistic creation
can be understood better through an examination of a variety of narratives
illuminating the intrinsic dimension of innovation. This Article examines both
theologically based and secular narratives about creativity drawn from a variety
of sources. The analysis demonstrates how deeply inspirational motivations are
embedded in Western civilization's perceptions about creativity and illustrates
how the insights derived from these narratives featuring inspirational
motivations for creativity can inform the discourse about the law of authors'
rights. Subsequently, the discussion demonstrates that the American legal system
historically has ignored the insights derived from these narratives as
fundamental sources of human sensibilities regarding artistic creation,
resulting in a legal system manifesting an incomplete view of artistic
creativity. It probes how the United States' law governing authors' rights has
been shaped in response to a largely different perspective, one that focuses on
economic as opposed to inspirational motivations. The analysis also demonstrates
that the insights derived from this perspective can facilitate the development
of appropriately tailored moral rights laws that would promote the policies
underlying authors' rights in this country. Finally, the discussion tackles how
the United States' law should be changed so that it can be more responsive to
all authorship interests rather than just those that are economically motivated.
It proposes a viable framework for stronger moral rights protection consistent
with our existing legal system.
