Title: Buying patterns of clothing during early adolescence: an exploratory study
Authors: Tshifhiwa Mulaudzi
ID: openalex.W852727549
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/2263/26072

The study is an exploratory investigation of early adolescents’ buying patterns
with regards to clothing using social identity theory. Interviews were conducted
with six early adolescents in Attridgeville suburb located in Tshwane (then
called Pretoria) in South Africa. This research was prompted by insufficient
archived studies which focus on black adolescents in South Africa. Early
adolescents are conscious of the youth culture and utilities that are
significant to them. The early adolescent stage construes young people as
seeking an own identity both individually and within the group. Clothing apparel
plays a significant role in the projection of adolescents’ identity in the peer
group, and they participate in consumer behaviour that is influenced through
socialization. Among others, peers and family circumstances play a central role
as socialisation agents for the buying patterns of clothing during adolescence.
In this study the Zaltman Metaphor Elicitation Technique (ZMET) was used to
explore the processes involved in the buying patterns of clothing during early
adolescence, particularly for black adolescents in an urban environment.
Pictures, compiled in the format of a collage, were used as a projective
technique to probe respondents’ constructions of their preferred buying patterns
and consumer behaviour. Data was analyzed using thematic analysis as a procedure
of qualitative research. Verification of transcripts and themes by an
independent third party enhanced validity and reliability of findings. Themes
indicate that early adolescents are quite involved in consumer behaviour and
make decisions based on lifestyle, consumer socialisation, purchasing styles and
filters. Both peers and family act as socialisation agents, and socio-structural
factors such as birth order, financial aspects, attitudes, and retail outlets
have an impact on the actual buying patterns of clothing. Further study is
needed to determine the effect of media and learning styles on the consumer
behaviour of black adolescents in a South African context.
