Title: Preparing teachers for diversity : a study of two university teacher education programs in Indiana.
Authors: Vella Goebel
ID: openalex.W2275347417
URL: https://doi.org/10.18297/etd/505

This study assessed the efficacy of diversity training in teacher education
programs at two Indiana universities from the viewpoints of teacher educators
and teacher education majors. Three research questions guided the study: (a) To
what extent did teacher educators exhibit classroom attitudes and behaviors
consistent with practicing diversity education? (b) To what extent did teacher
education majors perceive that teacher educators exhibited attitudes and
behaviors consistent with practicing diversity education? (c) Did teacher
education students and teacher educators agree about the extent to which their
institutions supported diversity initiatives? The research questions were
examined across the domains most frequently explored by diversity education
researchers: race/ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, and social class. The
study included both qualitative and quantitative data analysis. There were four
major findings for Midstates University: (a) only the race/ethnicity and social
class domains were included in their classes by teacher educators; (b) students
noted some instances of gender bias among faculty; (c) some students assessed
their diversity training as lacking in substance; and (d) both teacher educators
and students defined institutional support for diversity only in terms of
race/ethnicity and social class. There were five major findings for the
University of the Central Midwest: (a) the inclusion of the four diversity
domains varied by teacher educator; (b) students perceived faculty attitudes and
behaviors to be favorable toward race/ethnicity and social class; (c) student
perceptions of faculty attitudes and behaviors toward sexual orientation were
mixed; (d) students perceived a lack of practicality in their diversity
training; (e) faculty and students defined institutional support differently.
Major findings in the cross-case analysis in this study were (a) race/ethnicity
was the diversity domain most frequently included in regular teacher education
courses; (b) student and educator perceptions do not agree about the domains
included; (c) studnets and teacher educators disagree about the relevance of
diversity content; (d) teacher educators and education students agreed that
there was little institutional support for domains other than race/ethnicity;
(e) teacher educators and students define institutional support differently; and
(e) teacher educators perceive that a dearth of diverse field-placement sites
hamper diversity education efforts.
