Title: Is there a (fe)male approach? Understanding gender differences in entrepreneurship
Authors: Ingrid Verheul
ID: openalex.W1782673886
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/1765/2005

Ingrid Verheul (1975) graduated in Economics at Erasmus University Rotterdam in
1999. She started writing here PhD. thesis on female entrepreneurship in 2000.
In addition to female entrepreneurship, her research interests include
determinants of entrepreneurship and entrepreneurship education. Her work has
been published in several international scientific journals including Journal of
Business Venturing, Small Business Economics, International Small Business
Journal and International Journal of Entrepreneurship Education. She is co-
editor of the book: “Entrepreneurship: Determinants and Policy in a European-US
Comparison” published by Kluwer Academic Publishers in 2002. \nToday research
and policy have been more and more fuelled by the idea that female entrepreneurs
are important for economic progress. Not only do female entrepreneurs have an
important contribution to employment creation and GDP, they also seem to have
value through increasing entrepreneurial diversity. Together with the growing
number of female entrepreneurs throughout the world in the last decades there
has been an increase in the number of studies on female entrepreneurship.
Because most of these studies focus upon female entrepreneurship in Anglo-Saxon
countries, the understanding of the characteristics of female entrepreneurs and
the existence of gender differences in other developed countries is limited. The
present thesis investigates gender differences in entrepreneurship using
(predominantly) data from the Netherlands. Different aspects of entrepreneurship
are studied including the individual, the organization and the environment. A
systematic distinction is made between direct and indirect gender effects on
entrepreneurship to be able to disentangle ‘pure’ gender effects and effects of
factors that are correlated with gender. Findings indicate that female and male
entrepreneurs differ with respect to a range of aspects such as self-perception,
time investments, start-up capital and HRM. Most of these differences can be
attributed to indirect effects, although some evidence has been found for direct
gender effects.
