Title: The evolution of endocrinology
Authors: Jean D. Wilson
ID: openalex.W2147663300
URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2265.2005.02209.x

The invitation to give this lecture suggested that it would be appropriate to
take a broad look at the discipline of endocrinology, where it came from and its
current state of development. Such an undertaking is timely because the
discipline that we celebrate at this Congress, namely the concept that chemical
messengers constitute one of the major physiological control systems, is a
development of the twentieth century. Most students of the subject agree that
the concept of chemical messengers secreted into the blood to exert systemic
effects arose from the presentation of a paper in 1889 to the Societe de
Biologie in Paris by Charles-Edouard Brown-Séquard, a professor at the College
de France and one of the most distinguished physiologists of the nineteenth
century. In this lecture, Brown-Séquard1,2 reported that self-administration of
aqueous extracts of animal testes had enhanced his physical strength, improved
his intellectual capacity, and increased his sexual potency. This dramatic claim
was widely publicized in the lay press as well as within the medical community
and made him an instant, controversial celebrity. Brown-Séquard's father was a
sea captain from Philadelphia, his mother was French, and he was born on the
British island of Mauritius; he claimed citizenship and worked as a scientist in
all three countries during his career, so that endocrinology was international
from its founding.3,4 Although an uneasy fascination with rejuvenation continues
to haunt our field, the aim today is not to focus on Brown-Séquard but rather on
the aftermath of his lecture. Whatever the weakness of the rejuvenation claims
(and it took many years to disprove them), many scientists recognized the
explanatory potential of the concept of chemical messengers and were stimulated
to investigate extracts of other organs. Within a short time proof was obtained
for the existence of multiple chemical messengers, and a dynamic discipline was
born. Early milestones in the field are summarized in Table 1. In 1891, only two
years after Brown-Sequard's lecture, Murray administered thyroid extract to a
woman with myxoedema. In 1894 Oliver and Schäfer described epinephrine in
extracts of the adrenal medulla. In 1903 Bayliss and Starling discovered
secretin, and Starling chose the term hormone to describe all chemical
messengers. In succession, Bouin and Ancel deduced the role of the Leydig cells
in development of the male phenotype; MacCallum and Voetlin discovered the link
between the parathyroid glands and calcium metabolism; Farmi and von den Velden
treated diabetes insipidus with posterior pituitary extracts; Evans and Long
described growth hormone; and in 1922 came the discovery of insulin by Banting
and Best. By this time it was clear that hormones influence almost every
function in the body. More importantly, at a time when few drugs of any type
were effective, epinephrine was in use as a pressor substance, and organ
extracts were available for three major disorders – hypothyroidism, diabetes
insipidus and diabetes mellitus. This brief summary does not do justice to the
rapid, almost explosive growth of the new discipline. In 1910, Artur Biedl,
Professor of General and Experimental Pathology at the German University in
Prague, published a textbook of endocrinology5 that was promptly translated into
English. The book listed more than 8500 references, only about 1% of which had
been published prior to 1889. This averages to more than 400 papers a year
during the first 20 years of the field. The second edition in 1916 had almost 10
000 references. Endocrine societies (under a variety of names) were formed in
many countries, and dedicated journals were established, beginning in 1917 with
the publication of Endocrinology in the United States, followed by endocrine
journals in Italy (Endocrinologia e Pathologica Constituzionals), France (Revue
Francaise d'Endocrinologie) and Germany (Endokrinologie). According to Medvei,6
the publication rate in the field increased to about 1500 papers a year by the
end of the 1920s. A major impetus for this growth came from the fact that by the
end of the nineteenth century many disorders were known to be associated with
pathology in specific organs. For example, diabetes mellitus was linked to the
pancreas, adrenal insufficiency and pheochromocytoma to the adrenals,
hyperthyroidism and myxoedema to the thyroid, and acromegaly and gigantism to
the pituitary. In addition, the effects of surgical castration of men and women
were understood in considerable detail. The possibility that such disorders
might be due to over- or underproduction of chemical mediators had been widely
discussed. For example, shortly after the description of adrenal insufficiency
by Thomas Addison in 1855, Brown-Séquard showed that surgical removal of the
adrenal is lethal to dogs but was unable to keep adrenalectomized dogs alive by
administering adrenal extracts. Subsequent investigators were also unsuccessful
in prolonging life in Addison's disease with adrenal extracts.7 Consequently, it
is not surprising that Brown-Séquard's lecture stimulated a variety of
collaborations between basic and clinical scientists. As formulated by Doisy,8
hormone development involved a series of stages: Identification of the tissue
that produces a hormone Development of bioassay methods to identify the hormone
Preparation of active extracts that can be purified, using the relevant bioassay
Isolation, identification of structure, and synthesis of the hormone. Clinicians
were adept in identifying candidate organs and hormones, development of
bioassays was made possible by advances in physiology and pharmacology, and
purification, structural analysis and synthesis required organic chemists. The
most dramatic example of early hormone development is that of epinephrine.6 In
1894 George Oliver, a physician in Harrogate, had the idea that patients with
low blood pressure might benefit from extracts of the adrenal. Therefore, he
prepared a glycerin extract of beef adrenal medulla obtained from the local
butcher, injected the extract into his son, and observed contraction of the
boy's radial artery. [Sir Henry Dale9 commented that the boy deserved a
memorial.] Oliver went to London and persuaded the somewhat sceptical
pharmacologist Edward Schäfer to inject the extract into a dog that had an
intra-arterial monitor in place. This famous experiment is illustrated in Fig.
1– a kymograph tracing of the rise in arterial blood pressure in the dog
following the administration of Oliver's extract. In 1897 Abel and Crawford at
the Johns Hopkins Hospital used the Oliver/Schäfer bioassay to purify the active
principle as a monobenzoyl derivative of epinephrine that was not very active
physiologically. The effect of extracts of the suprarenal capsule in the dog:
(a) pressure in the ventricle; (b) pressure in the atrium; (c) blood pressure;
(d) injection interval. From Oliver and Schäfer, Journal of Physiology, 1895,
republished by Schäfer (1916).51 The therapeutic and financial potential of
hormones had been apparent from the first, and it was inevitable that
pharmaceutical companies would become involved in hormone development. In 1901
support from the Parke-Davis company allowed the Japanese-American Jokicki
Takamine and an American, T. B. Aldrich, to purify the native hormone
independently and establish its structure. To complete the story, the German
chemist Friedrich Stolz synthesized epinephrine in 1904. The importance of the
bioassay in this process cannot be overemphasized. Such assays varied in
simplicity and sensitivity from measurement of blood sugar response for insulin
and the chick comb assay for testosterone to tedious and inefficient systems
such as prolongation of life in the adrenalectomized dog by cortisone or
assaying the regression of mullerian ducts in organ culture for antimullerian
hormone. Some hormones were purified using bioassay systems that were not
related to the main action of the hormone in mammals. For example, vasopressin
was characterized as the pressor substance of the posterior pituitary rather
than for its antidiuretic properties, and prolactin was purified using the
pigeon crop assay. By the mid-1920s endocrinology had completed its adolescence.
It was an international undertaking that was stimulated by clinical problems; it
involved collaborations between clinical and basic scientists; the research was
financed in large part by the pharmaceutical industry; and it had undergone a
remarkable growth to become a major branch of medicine and of biomedical
science. In the past 75 years the field has undergone major changes or, in
current jargon, paradigm shifts. These changes include recognition of feedback
control, the impact of organic chemistry, the introduction of artificial
isotopes, recognition of the developmental role of hormones, development of the
radioimmunoassay, the shift of focus to hormone action, the impact of molecular
biology, and the unification of endocrinology, immunology and neuroscience into
a single discipline. The fact that production rates and blood levels of hormones
are controlled by negative and positive feedback mechanisms is the central and
unifying paradigm of endocrinology from dynamic tests of endocrine function to
the development of oral contraceptives. The concept of feedback control was
first formulated in reproductive endocrinology.10 In 1909 Tandler and Grosz
described pituitary enlargement after castration of men,11 but the first
experimental evidence for feedback control of gonadotrophins was obtained by
Carl R. Moore and Dorothy Price,12 who described a reciprocal relationship
between the testes and the anterior pituitary. They showed that testicular
hormones suppress the pituitary, making available a reduced amount of
gonadotrophins, that gonadotrophins are essential for spermatogenesis and for
androgen production by the testes, and that androgens act directly and
independently on target tissues. Moore and Price13 subsequently showed that the
ovaries and pituitary have a similar reciprocal relationship. In 1932 McCullagh
described separate roles for inhibin and gonadal steroids in the regulation of
the pituitary,14 and Walter Hohlweg and Karl Junkmann, scientists in the
Schering laboratory in Berlin, extended the concepts of Moore and Price by
deducing that the gonads, central nervous system and pituitary interact in a
triangular system.15,16 Dorothy Price17 recounted that she did not find a
diagram of the pituitary–gonadal relationship in her laboratory notebooks or
early published work. The diagram of Hohlweg and Junkmann shown in Fig. 215
appears to be the first such schematic. The gonads (either ovaries or testes)
secrete hormones that feed back on the central nervous system, which in turn
controls the anterior pituitary. The pituitary in turn secretes gonadotrophins
that regulate hormone formation by the gonads. A role for the central nervous
system in this process was deduced by demonstrating that testes continue to
secrete hormones after transplantation to other sites in the body as long as the
pituitary is intact, whereas transplanted pituitaries lose the capacity to
function. The interdependent relationship between the gonads (keim-drüse), the
central nervous system and the pituitary. Reproduced courtesy of Springer-
Verlag© 1932.15 Geoffrey Harris18 identified the hypothalamus as the control
site for the pituitary–gonadal axis in the central nervous system by inducing
ovulation in the rabbit after electrical stimulation of either the pituitary or
the hypothalamus. Thus, in a short interval, the essential components of the
hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal system were defined. Reciprocal relationships
between the pituitary and other peripheral organs were then established. For
example, W. T. Salter19 diagrammed the relation between the thyroid, the
hypothalamus and the pituitary in what he termed the pituitary–thyroid axis. The
term feed-back was first applied to endocrine control systems by Roy G.
Haskins20 in an editorial in the Journal of Clinical Endocrinology. Engineers
had developed the theory of servo mechanisms in the 1930s and 1940s to describe
automatically controlled systems such as thermostats, a field that came to be
termed cybernetics, and Norbert Weiner,21 a theoretician in the field, had
pointed out that insight might be gained into biological control mechanisms by
application of servo theory. Hoskins, who had been the first editor of
Endocrinology, expanded on Weiner's suggestion and pointed out that resetting of
the sensitivity of the pituitary to feedback by thyroid hormones could result in
either hyper- or hypothyroidism, a remarkable anticipation of the
pathophysiology of hormone resistance states and pituitary adenomas.
Introduction of the term 'feedback' to describe control mechanisms for all
hormonal systems had a unifying effect similar to that of Starling's
introduction of the word 'hormone'. The field expanded dramatically with the
discovery of the hypothalamic–portal blood system and characterization of the
hypothalamic releasing and inhibiting hormones. The epinephrine paradigm for
hormone discovery was not easy to repeat because of obstacles to hormone
purification and structural analysis. These difficulties included: cumbersome
and inefficient bioassay systems that consumed large portions of the extracts at
every stage of purification; primitive purification techniques; the fact that
hormones constitute only trace components of most organ extracts (cortisol is
approximately 1 millionth of the weight of adrenal glands); and inadequate
spectroscopic methods for structural analyses. As a consequence, only three
hormones (epinephrine, thyroxine and insulin) had been crystallized by 1926, and
the structure had been solved only for epinephrine. Most early endocrine
research (and most early endocrine drugs) involved impure tissue extracts that
varied in purity and potency in different laboratories. The impact of advances
in organic chemistry in the late 1920s began with solution of the structure of
thyroxine by Harrington and Barger.22 Then, elucidation of the phenanthrine
structure of cholesterol and bile acids by Wieland and Windaus initiated a
remarkable era in which vitamin D2 and 10 steroid hormones were purified between
1929 and 1954 (Table 2). The term 'heroic' is appropriate because of the
enormous quantity of starting materials required for all except vitamin D2; in
the most extreme case, Kendall23 estimated that his laboratory processed 150
tons of beef adrenals between 1930 and 1950. Steroid hormone development was an
international undertaking, involving German, Dutch, Polish, Swiss, British and
American laboratories. Considering the enormous expense involved in these
purifications, it is not surprising that drug companies financed the development
of many steroid hormones. Some of the investigators were employees of the
companies, and in other instances the companies supported academic laboratories.
Elucidation of structure also made possible the chemical synthesis of many
hormones. As noted above, epinephrine was synthesized by Stolz in 1904, and
Harrington and Barger synthesized thyroxine in 1927. However, pharmaceutical
companies continued to produce both of these drugs from animal extracts for many
years. Steroid hormones synthesized from plant sterols had a more immediate
clinical impact. Ruzicka synthesized the first steroid hormone androsterone, and
synthetic deoxycorticosterone, corticosterone, and cortisone became available
for use in patients. Advanced synthetic techniques made possible development of
superagonists, contraceptives and antihormones for a multitude of purposes.
Structural analysis was slower for the peptide hormones and did not break until
the 1950s with elucidation of the structures of vasopressin and oxytocin by du
Vigneaud and of insulin by Sanger. The discovery in the 1930s by the Joliot-
Curies in France that artificial isotopes can be produced by neutron bombardment
had an enormous impact on every branch of biological science. The first impact
of isotopes in endocrinology was in the thyroid field.24128Iodine with a half-
life of 30 minutes was supplied in 1938 by Karl Compton at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology to the thyroid clinic at the Massachusetts General
Hospital (MGH), where Hertz, Roberts and Davis demonstrated specific uptake of
the isotope by the rabbit thyroid.25 In 1939 Glenn Sebourg at the University of
California Berkeley produced 131iodine with a half-life of 8 days, and Hamilton
and Soley26 used the isotope to demonstrate increased thyroid uptake of
radioiodine in the of the American for Clinical and Roberts from the and
Hamilton and from the University of California both reported of hyperthyroidism
with and and his in regression of thyroid with had the thyroid field, and
therapeutic and making it one of the most of clinical Development of other
isotopes, of and made possible the elucidation of the involved in hormone
synthesis and development of techniques for improved hormone of the rates of
hormone production and and development of hormones of specific for use in
characterization of hormone The first developmental in endocrinology involved
gonadal hormones. It had been recognized in the nineteenth century that male and
during the first of and that of the two does not become apparent until in
development. Bouin and that the testicular hormone of the is produced by the
Leydig suggested that the of the Leydig cells of the development of the male The
effects of hormones on sexual development were then in many of gonadal steroids
can gonadal and in and by the 1920s to the that gonadal steroids control the
development of both the gonads and the sexual However, this concept into when to
beginning with in the American by of with gonadal steroids does not gonadal or
the basic sexual when the or In the a of the sexual is directly by the the
experiment in in which he showed that castration of the early male rabbit in
formation of a and that two testicular hormones, androgen and antimullerian
control male development. In the gonadal and gonadal in turn controls
development of hormonal insight into sexual and made possible of the disorders
of and animal was also a in the effects of other hormonal systems in a field
that is a major branch of Most chemical assays are not or specific for the
measurement of hormones in and isotope derivative assays were developed for
hormones in and but had to patients so that clinical endocrinology This state of
dramatically with development of the radioimmunoassay, the result of between a
and a physician In observed to insulin in the of who had been treated with
insulin and this to a for on the insight that of of insulin to the could be used
to the amount of insulin in biological Within a short of were developed for many
thyroid and steroid hormones, the field and the of assay from to levels and This
had on endocrine research and on clinical It was not until that was first used
of endocrinology to in assays and techniques can with had endocrinology from the
states of hormone or and the other on the effects of hormone was to the
mechanisms by which hormones exert effects within target tissues. Endocrine
research – clinical and basic – was by the by and that is due to a in substance
in target cells with which parathyroid hormone In papers the and of the of
resistance to many other hormones were subsequently identified by and in and the
concept that can result because the cannot to or increased levels of a hormone
as a major impetus to shift the focus from hormone measurement to hormone action
and hormone The concept of arose from by the of in the nineteenth According to
the first description of for was in a paper by G. and who deduced that in The of
hormones of specific to the characterization of two broad of hormone – that
influence and that control of function were by of and the associated from and
with or of hormone has had a impact on of the that peptide hormones made it
possible to produce hormones by This out to be of enormous because it had been
possible to extract growth hormone from pituitaries to clinical and because
increased made it to produce insulin from animal organs. hormones are produced
by this new hormones as and have been identified by of the for hormone and the
involved in hormone synthesis and made it possible to identify that influence
the function of the became and in such as involved in and have been use of and
to investigate hormone action has the field from on of such as the hormone
resistance states and new for hormone action in organs or and have for hormone
was by with of chemical control as that every single tissue in every separate of
the secretes or which are into the blood and which influence every other In this
a is between all the cells of the by other than the nervous The that the
chemical and control systems were was by in the and the system was identified as
the major control system by which cells The concept of three separate control
systems began to almost first with to the between the endocrine and The first
suggestion that is is to T. R. who that epinephrine is the chemical when the at
the who formulated a control system Henry Walter and and It is in to the of the
concept of the A similar in has immunology and endocrinology by beginning with
that hormones such as regulate This was followed by that from cells influence
many endocrine systems and that endocrine also it became apparent that a
involving hormones and evidence has also for between the and nervous In the
concept of three systems of cells has been by recognition of a control involving
and chemical messengers. to its in clinical medicine and between clinical and
basic endocrinology today the field in the early twentieth century. The changes
in the field in the past 75 years are due to the application of advances in
other – chemistry, and molecular biology, neuroscience and – so that hormones
are and in new The shift of focus to hormone action molecular endocrinology into
the of and developmental biology, and advances of have the between
endocrinology, and Endocrine continues to be one of the most dynamic of
biomedical and endocrinology is the most of the clinical is of medicine in which
between the clinical and basic has been more This is to celebrate the in the
field. It is also appropriate to the impact that endocrinology has had on other
of biomedical science. have described many of these the most is such as insulin
and oral two of the very therapeutic advances of the twentieth century. A second
was the application of the concept of feedback control to other biological A
impact is the radioimmunoassay, which from endocrinology and is one of the most
widely used methods for the measurement of biological A impact was the discovery
of and the which our of to the impact of endocrinology on is to look at the in
the field when the in or for the surgical of hyperthyroidism (Table A second was
also for of of the hormone structure, synthesis or were for physiological and to
and to and two and to and were for of hormone The fact that many advances in
endocrinology have been recognized by the is a of be in the in the past have the
concept of endocrinology as a discipline of basic science. and this in a basic
endocrinology To of the molecular mechanisms which hormones act is of major
importance in to and the of clinical However, the elucidation of more molecular
such as the of to second messengers and has also an is it to of basic
endocrinology, or are all of this discipline in the field of molecular The
biomedical were into when research methods were and such were for and as the
basic as a discipline is not to endocrinology and can be as a of advances that
artificial between the of endocrinology and molecular and as as it does hormones
does to be to the appropriate of both clinical and basic scientists in our but
is for that endocrinology as a basic as well as a clinical discipline for at
three a large of and candidate are known to many of which turn out to be
hormones and hormone that control many of the major in the field systems or
animal Such include the control of physiological such as growth and by multiple
the of biological with the endocrine the of the and and the control of and
developmental such as involved in sexual and These cannot be solved by or by of
single but a in a discipline by in and molecular The field of endocrinology is
to such a the field continues to be stimulated by clinical the that the growth
in the field at the turn of the twentieth century. only are we with many about
such as diabetes and in addition, new and new clinical continue to be recognized
and to basic as well as clinical scientists. of Endocrinology be in and and it
is that the clinical and basic scientists today would not in It is not easy to
and on the of Medvei,6 and for the early on and and for the steroid hormones,
and and for the impact of radioiodine on thyroid on this subject that are in the
of to from in of papers published in and to focus on physiology at the expense
of in other This paper both of these
