Title: Combining Gamification and Intelligent Tutoring Systems in a Serious Game for Engineering Education
Authors: Ying Tang, Ryan Hare
ID: 2305.16568
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16568

Abstract:
We provide ongoing results from the development of a personalized learning system integrated into a serious game. Given limited instructor resources, the use of computerized systems to help tutor students offers a way to provide higher quality education and to improve educational efficacy. Personalized learning systems like the one proposed in this paper offer an accessible solution. Furthermore, by combining such a system with a serious game, students are further engaged in interacting with the system. The proposed learning system combines expert-driven structure and lesson planning with computational intelligence methods and gamification to provide students with a fun and educational experience. As the project is ongoing from past years, numerous design iterations have been made on the system based on feedback from students and classroom observations. Using computational intelligence, the system adaptively provides support to students based on data collected from both their in-game actions and by estimating their emotional state from webcam images. For our evaluation, we focus on student data gathered from in-classroom testing in relevant courses, with both educational efficacy, results and student observations. To demonstrate the effect of our proposed system, students in an early electrical engineering course were instructed to interact with the system in place of a standard lab assignment. The system would then measure and help them improve their background knowledge before allowing them to complete the lab assignment. As they played through the game, we observed their interactions with the system to gather insights for future work. Additionally, we demonstrate the system's educational efficacy through pre-post-test results from students who played the game with and without the personalized learning system.
