Title: Which architecture should be implemented to manage data from the real world, in an Unreal Engine 5 simulator and in the context of mixed reality?
Authors: Jonathan Cassaing
ID: 2305.09244
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.09244

Abstract:
Due to its ability to generate millions of particles, massively detailed scenes and confusing artificial illumination with reality, the version 5 of Unreal Engine promises unprecedented industrial applications. The paradigms and aims of Unreal Engine contrast with the industrial simulators typically used by the scientific community. The visual quality and performance of its rendering engine increase the opportunities, especially for industries and simulation business: where interoperability and scalability are required. The study of the following issue `` Which architecture should we implement to integrate real-world data, in an Unreal Engine 5 simulator and in a mixed-reality environment? '' offers a point of view. The topic is reexamined in an innovative and conceptual way, such as the generalization of mixedreality technologies, Internet of Things, digital twins, Big Data but providing a solution for simple and actual use cases. This paper gives a detailed analysis of the issue, at both theoretical and operational level. Then, the document goes deep into Unreal Engine's operation in order to extract the vanilla capabilities. Next, the C++ Plugin system is reviewed in details as well as the third-party library integration: pitfalls to be avoided are shown. Finally, the last chapter proposes a generic architecture, useful in large-scale industrial 3D applications, such as collaborative work or hyper-connected simulators. This document might be of interest to an Unreal Engine expert who would like to discover about server architectures. Conversely, it could be relevant for an expert in backend servers who wants to learn about Unreal Engine capabilities. This research concludes that Unreal Engine's modularity enables integration with almost any protocol. The features to integrate external real data are numerous but depend on use cases. Distributed systems for Big Data require a scalable architecture, possibly without the use of the Unreal Engine dedicated server. Environments, which require sub-second latency need to implement direct connections, bypassing any intermediate servers.
