Title: Securing Microservices and Microservice Architectures: A Systematic Mapping Study
Authors: Abdelhakim Hannousse, Salima Yahiouche
ID: 2003.07262
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.07262

Abstract:
Microservice architectures (MSA) are becoming trending alternatives to existing
software development paradigms notably for developing complex and distributed
applications. Microservices emerged as an architectural design pattern aiming to
address the scalability and ease the maintenance of online services. However,
security breaches have increased threatening availability, integrity and
confidentiality of microservice-based systems. A growing body of literature is
found addressing security threats and security mechanisms to individual
microservices and microservice architectures. The aim of this study is to
provide a helpful guide to developers about already recognized threats on
microservices and how they can be detected, mitigated or prevented; we also aim
to identify potential research gaps on securing MSA. In this paper, we conduct a
systematic mapping in order to categorize threats on MSA with their security
proposals. Therefore, we extracted threats and details of proposed solutions
reported in selected studies. Obtained results are used to design a lightweight
ontology for security patterns of MSA. The ontology can be queried to identify
source of threats, security mechanisms used to prevent each threat,
applicability layer and validation techniques used for each mechanism. The
systematic search yielded 1067 studies of which 46 are selected as primary
studies. The results of the mapping revealed an unbalanced research focus in
favor of external attacks; auditing and enforcing access control are the most
investigated techniques compared with prevention and mitigation. Additionally,
we found that most proposed solutions are soft-infrastructure applicable layer
compared with other layers such as communication and deployment. We also found
that performance analysis and case studies are the most used validation
techniques of security proposals.
