Title: On the Replicability and Reproducibility of Deep Learning in Software Engineering
Authors: Chao Liu, Cuiyun Gao, Xin Xia, David Lo, John Grundy et al.
ID: 2006.14244
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.14244

Abstract:
Deep learning (DL) techniques have gained significant popularity among software
engineering (SE) researchers in recent years. This is because they can often
solve many SE challenges without enormous manual feature engineering effort and
complex domain knowledge. Although many DL studies have reported substantial
advantages over other state-of-the-art models on effectiveness, they often
ignore two factors: (1) replicability - whether the reported experimental result
can be approximately reproduced in high probability with the same DL model and
the same data; and (2) reproducibility - whether one reported experimental
findings can be reproduced by new experiments with the same experimental
protocol and DL model, but different sampled real-world data. Unlike traditional
machine learning (ML) models, DL studies commonly overlook these two factors and
declare them as minor threats or leave them for future work. This is mainly due
to high model complexity with many manually set parameters and the
time-consuming optimization process. In this study, we conducted a literature
review on 93 DL studies recently published in twenty SE journals or conferences.
Our statistics show the urgency of investigating these two factors in SE.
Moreover, we re-ran four representative DL models in SE. Experimental results
show the importance of replicability and reproducibility, where the reported
performance of a DL model could not be replicated for an unstable optimization
process. Reproducibility could be substantially compromised if the model
training is not convergent, or if performance is sensitive to the size of
vocabulary and testing data. It is therefore urgent for the SE community to
provide a long-lasting link to a replication package, enhance DL-based solution
stability and convergence, and avoid performance sensitivity on different
sampled data.
