Title: Channel-Selective Normalization for Label-Shift Robust Test-Time Adaptation
Authors: Pedro Vianna, Muawiz Chaudhary, Paria Mehrbod, An Tang, Guy Cloutier et al.
ID: 2402.04958
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.04958

Abstract:
Deep neural networks have useful applications in many different tasks, however
their performance can be severely affected by changes in the data distribution.
For example, in the biomedical field, their performance can be affected by
changes in the data (different machines, populations) between training and test
datasets. To ensure robustness and generalization to real-world scenarios,
test-time adaptation has been recently studied as an approach to adjust models
to a new data distribution during inference. Test-time batch normalization is a
simple and popular method that achieved compelling performance on domain shift
benchmarks. It is implemented by recalculating batch normalization statistics on
test batches. Prior work has focused on analysis with test data that has the
same label distribution as the training data. However, in many practical
applications this technique is vulnerable to label distribution shifts,
sometimes producing catastrophic failure. This presents a risk in applying test
time adaptation methods in deployment. We propose to tackle this challenge by
only selectively adapting channels in a deep network, minimizing drastic
adaptation that is sensitive to label shifts. Our selection scheme is based on
two principles that we empirically motivate: (1) later layers of networks are
more sensitive to label shift (2) individual features can be sensitive to
specific classes. We apply the proposed technique to three classification tasks,
including CIFAR10-C, Imagenet-C, and diagnosis of fatty liver, where we explore
both covariate and label distribution shifts. We find that our method allows to
bring the benefits of TTA while significantly reducing the risk of failure
common in other methods, while being robust to choice in hyperparameters.
