Title: RITFIS: Robust input testing framework for LLMs-based intelligent software
Authors: Mingxuan Xiao, Yan Xiao, Hai Dong, Shunhui Ji, Pengcheng Zhang
ID: 2402.13518
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.13518

Abstract:
The dependence of Natural Language Processing (NLP) intelligent software on
Large Language Models (LLMs) is increasingly prominent, underscoring the
necessity for robustness testing. Current testing methods focus solely on the
robustness of LLM-based software to prompts. Given the complexity and diversity
of real-world inputs, studying the robustness of LLMbased software in handling
comprehensive inputs (including prompts and examples) is crucial for a thorough
understanding of its performance. To this end, this paper introduces RITFIS, a
Robust Input Testing Framework for LLM-based Intelligent Software. To our
knowledge, RITFIS is the first framework designed to assess the robustness of
LLM-based intelligent software against natural language inputs. This framework,
based on given threat models and prompts, primarily defines the testing process
as a combinatorial optimization problem. Successful test cases are determined by
a goal function, creating a transformation space for the original examples
through perturbation means, and employing a series of search methods to filter
cases that meet both the testing objectives and language constraints. RITFIS,
with its modular design, offers a comprehensive method for evaluating the
robustness of LLMbased intelligent software. RITFIS adapts 17 automated testing
methods, originally designed for Deep Neural Network (DNN)-based intelligent
software, to the LLM-based software testing scenario. It demonstrates the
effectiveness of RITFIS in evaluating LLM-based intelligent software through
empirical validation. However, existing methods generally have limitations,
especially when dealing with lengthy texts and structurally complex threat
models. Therefore, we conducted a comprehensive analysis based on five metrics
and provided insightful testing method optimization strategies, benefiting both
researchers and everyday users.
