Title: Multimodal Action Quality Assessment
Authors: Ling-An Zeng, Wei-Shi Zheng
ID: 2402.09444
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.09444

Abstract:
Action quality assessment (AQA) is to assess how well an action is performed.
Previous works perform modelling by only the use of visual information, ignoring
audio information. We argue that although AQA is highly dependent on visual
information, the audio is useful complementary information for improving the
score regression accuracy, especially for sports with background music, such as
figure skating and rhythmic gymnastics. To leverage multimodal information for
AQA, i.e., RGB, optical flow and audio information, we propose a Progressive
Adaptive Multimodal Fusion Network (PAMFN) that separately models
modality-specific information and mixed-modality information. Our model consists
of with three modality-specific branches that independently explore
modality-specific information and a mixed-modality branch that progressively
aggregates the modality-specific information from the modality-specific
branches. To build the bridge between modality-specific branches and the
mixed-modality branch, three novel modules are proposed. First, a
Modality-specific Feature Decoder module is designed to selectively transfer
modality-specific information to the mixed-modality branch. Second, when
exploring the interaction between modality-specific information, we argue that
using an invariant multimodal fusion policy may lead to suboptimal results, so
as to take the potential diversity in different parts of an action into
consideration. Therefore, an Adaptive Fusion Module is proposed to learn
adaptive multimodal fusion policies in different parts of an action. This module
consists of several FusionNets for exploring different multimodal fusion
strategies and a PolicyNet for deciding which FusionNets are enabled. Third, a
module called Cross-modal Feature Decoder is designed to transfer cross-modal
features generated by Adaptive Fusion Module to the mixed-modality branch.
