Title: Interactive Test-Time Adaptation with Reliable Spatial-Temporal Voxels for Multi-Modal Segmentation
Authors: Haozhi Cao, Yuecong Xu, Pengyu Yin, Xingyu Ji, Shenghai Yuan et al.
ID: 2403.06461
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.06461

Abstract:
Multi-modal test-time adaptation (MM-TTA) adapts models to an unlabeled target
domain by leveraging the complementary multi-modal inputs in an online manner.
While previous MM-TTA methods for 3D segmentation offer a promising solution by
leveraging self-refinement per frame, they suffer from two major limitations: 1)
unstable frame-wise predictions caused by temporal inconsistency, and 2)
consistently incorrect predictions that violate the assumption of reliable
modality guidance. To address these limitations, this work introduces a
comprehensive two-fold framework. Firstly, building upon our previous work
ReLiable Spatial-temporal Voxels (Latte), we propose Latte++ that better
suppresses the unstable frame-wise predictions with more informative geometric
correspondences. Instead of utilizing a universal sliding window, Latte++
employs multi-window aggregation to capture more reliable correspondences to
better evaluate the local prediction consistency of different semantic
categories. Secondly, to tackle the consistently incorrect predictions, we
propose Interactive Test-Time Adaptation (ITTA), a flexible add-on to empower
effortless human feedback with existing MM-TTA methods. ITTA introduces a novel
human-in-the-loop approach that efficiently integrates minimal human feedback
through interactive segmentation, requiring only simple point clicks and
bounding box annotations. Instead of using independent interactive networks,
ITTA employs a lightweight promptable branch with a momentum gradient module to
capture and reuse knowledge from scarce human feedback during online inference.
Extensive experiments across five MM-TTA benchmarks demonstrate that ITTA
achieves consistent and notable improvements with robust performance gains for
target classes of interest in challenging imbalanced scenarios, while Latte++
provides complementary benefits for temporal stability.
