Title: The Framework of a Design Process Language
Authors: Arnulf Hagen
ID: 2404.13721
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.13721

Abstract:
The thesis develops a view of design in a concept formation framework and
outlines a language to describe both the object of the design and the process of
designing. The unknown object at the outset of the design work may be seen as an
unknown concept that the designer is to define. Throughout the process, she
develops a description of this object by relating it to known concepts. The
search stops when the designer is satisfied that the design specification is
complete enough to satisfy the requirements from it once built. It is then a
collection of propositions that all contribute towards defining the design
object - a collection of sentences describing relationships between the object
and known concepts. Also, the design process itself may be described by relating
known concepts - by organizing known abilities into particular patterns of
activation, or mobilization. In view of the demands posed to a language to use
in this concept formation process, the framework of a Design Process Language
(DPL) is developed. The basis for the language are linguistic categories that
act as classes of relations used to combine concepts, containing relations used
for describing process and object within the same general system, with some
relations being process specific, others being object specific, and with the
bulk being used both for process and object description. Another outcome is the
distinction of modal relations, or relations describing futurity, possibility,
willingness, hypothetical events, and the like. The design process almost always
includes aspects such as these, and it is thus necessary for a language
facilitating design process description to support such relationships to be
constructed. The DPL is argued to be a foundation whereupon to build a language
that can be used for enabling computers to be more useful - act more
intelligently - in the design process.
