Title: Static Application Security Testing (SAST) Tools for Smart Contracts: How Far Are We?
Authors: Kaixuan Li, Yue Xue, Sen Chen, Han Liu, Kairan Sun et al.
ID: 2404.18186
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.18186

Abstract:
In recent years, the importance of smart contract security has been heightened
by the increasing number of attacks against them. To address this issue, a
multitude of static application security testing (SAST) tools have been proposed
for detecting vulnerabilities in smart contracts. However, objectively comparing
these tools to determine their effectiveness remains challenging. Existing
studies often fall short due to the taxonomies and benchmarks only covering a
coarse and potentially outdated set of vulnerability types, which leads to
evaluations that are not entirely comprehensive and may display bias. In this
paper, we fill this gap by proposing an up-to-date and fine-grained taxonomy
that includes 45 unique vulnerability types for smart contracts. Taking it as a
baseline, we develop an extensive benchmark that covers 40 distinct types and
includes a diverse range of code characteristics, vulnerability patterns, and
application scenarios. Based on them, we evaluated 8 SAST tools using this
benchmark, which comprises 788 smart contract files and 10,394 vulnerabilities.
Our results reveal that the existing SAST tools fail to detect around 50% of
vulnerabilities in our benchmark and suffer from high false positives, with
precision not surpassing 10%. We also discover that by combining the results of
multiple tools, the false negative rate can be reduced effectively, at the
expense of flagging 36.77 percentage points more functions. Nevertheless, many
vulnerabilities, especially those beyond Access Control and Reentrancy
vulnerabilities, remain undetected. We finally highlight the valuable insights
from our study, hoping to provide guidance on tool development, enhancement,
evaluation, and selection for developers, researchers, and practitioners.
