Title: How Multi-Modal LLMs Reshape Visual Deep Learning Testing? A Comprehensive Study Through the Lens of Image Mutation
Authors: Liwen Wang, Yuanyuan Yuan, Ao Sun, Zongjie Li, Pingchuan Ma et al.
ID: 2404.13945
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.13945

Abstract:
Visual deep learning (VDL) systems have shown significant success in real-world
applications like image recognition, object detection, and autonomous driving.
To evaluate the reliability of VDL, a mainstream approach is software testing,
which requires diverse mutations over image semantics. The rapid development of
multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) has introduced revolutionary image
mutation potentials through instruction-driven methods. Users can now freely
describe desired mutations and let MLLMs generate the mutated images. Hence,
parallel to large language models' (LLMs) recent success in traditional software
fuzzing, one may also expect MLLMs to be promising for VDL testing in terms of
offering unified, diverse, and complex image mutations. However, the quality and
applicability of MLLM-based mutations in VDL testing remain largely unexplored.
We present the first study, aiming to assess MLLMs' adequacy from 1) the
semantic validity of MLLM mutated images, 2) the alignment of MLLM mutated
images with their text instructions (prompts), and 3) the faithfulness of how
different mutations preserve semantics that are ought to remain unchanged. With
large-scale human studies and quantitative evaluations, we identify MLLM's
promising potentials in expanding the covered semantics of image mutations.
Notably, while SoTA MLLMs (e.g., GPT-4V) fail to support or perform worse in
editing existing semantics in images (as in traditional mutations like
rotation), they generate high-quality test inputs using "semantic-replacement"
mutations (e.g., "dress a dog with clothes"), which bring extra semantics to
images; these were infeasible for past approaches. Hence, we view MLLM-based
mutations as a vital complement to traditional mutations, and advocate future
VDL testing tasks to combine MLLM-based methods and traditional image mutations
for comprehensive and reliable testing.
