Title: Runtime Verification and Field-based Testing for ROS-based Robotic Systems
Authors: Ricardo Caldas, Juan Antonio Pinera Garcia, Matei Schiopu, Patrizio Pelliccione, Genaina Rodrigues et al.
ID: 2404.11498
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.11498

Abstract:
Robotic systems are becoming pervasive and adopted in increasingly many domains,
such as manufacturing, healthcare, and space exploration. To this end,
engineering software has emerged as a crucial discipline for building
maintainable and reusable robotic systems. The robotics software engineering
research field has received increasing attention, fostering autonomy as a
fundamental goal. However, robotics developers are still challenged to achieve
this goal because simulation cannot realistically deliver solutions to emulate
real-world phenomena. Robots also need to operate in unpredictable and
uncontrollable environments, which require safe and trustworthy self-adaptation
capabilities implemented in software. Typical techniques to address the
challenges are runtime verification, field-based testing, and mitigation
techniques that enable fail-safe solutions. However, no clear guidance exists
for architecting ROS-based systems to enable and facilitate runtime verification
and field-based testing. This paper aims to fill this gap by providing
guidelines to help developers and quality assurance (QA) teams develop, verify,
or test their robots in the field. These guidelines are carefully tailored to
address the challenges and requirements of testing robotics systems in
real-world scenarios. We conducted (i) a literature review on studies addressing
runtime verification and field-based testing for robotic systems, (ii) mined
ROS-based applications repositories, and (iii) validated the applicability,
clarity, and usefulness via two questionnaires with 55 answers overall. We
contribute 20 guidelines: 8 for developers and 12 for QA teams formulated for
researchers and practitioners in robotic software engineering. Finally, we map
our guidelines to open challenges in runtime verification and field-based
testing for ROS-based systems, and we outline promising research directions in
the field.
