Title: Defect Category Prediction Based on Multi-Source Domain Adaptation
Authors: Ying Xing, Mengci Zhao, Bin Yang, Yuwei Zhang, Wenjin Li et al.
ID: 2405.10511
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.10511

Abstract:
In recent years, defect prediction techniques based on deep learning have become
a prominent research topic in the field of software engineering. These
techniques can identify potential defects without executing the code. However,
existing approaches mostly concentrate on determining the presence of defects at
the method-level code, lacking the ability to precisely classify specific defect
categories. Consequently, this undermines the efficiency of developers in
locating and rectifying defects. Furthermore, in practical software development,
new projects often lack sufficient defect data to train high-accuracy deep
learning models. Models trained on historical data from existing projects
frequently struggle to achieve satisfactory generalization performance on new
projects. Hence, this paper initially reformulates the traditional binary defect
prediction task into a multi-label classification problem, employing defect
categories described in the Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE) as fine-grained
predictive labels. To enhance the model performance in cross-project scenarios,
this paper proposes a multi-source domain adaptation framework that integrates
adversarial training and attention mechanisms. Specifically, the proposed
framework employs adversarial training to mitigate domain (i.e., software
projects) discrepancies, and further utilizes domain-invariant features to
capture feature correlations between each source domain and the target domain.
Simultaneously, the proposed framework employs a weighted maximum mean
discrepancy as an attention mechanism to minimize the representation distance
between source and target domain features, facilitating model in learning more
domain-independent features. The experiments on 8 real-world open-source
projects show that the proposed approach achieves significant performance
improvements compared to state-of-the-art baselines.
