Title: Continuous Test-time Domain Adaptation for Efficient Fault Detection under Evolving Operating Conditions
Authors: Han Sun, Kevin Ammann, Stylianos Giannoulakis, Olga Fink
ID: 2406.06607
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.06607

Abstract:
Fault detection is crucial in industrial systems to prevent failures and
optimize performance by distinguishing abnormal from normal operating
conditions. Data-driven methods have been gaining popularity for fault detection
tasks as the amount of condition monitoring data from complex industrial systems
increases. Despite these advances, early fault detection remains a challenge
under real-world scenarios. The high variability of operating conditions and
environments makes it difficult to collect comprehensive training datasets that
can represent all possible operating conditions, especially in the early stages
of system operation. Furthermore, these variations often evolve over time,
potentially leading to entirely new data distributions in the future that were
previously unseen. These challenges prevent direct knowledge transfer across
different units and over time, leading to the distribution gap between training
and testing data and inducing performance degradation of those methods in
real-world scenarios. To overcome this, our work introduces a novel approach for
continuous test-time domain adaptation. This enables early-stage robust anomaly
detection by addressing domain shifts and limited data representativeness
issues. We propose a Test-time domain Adaptation Anomaly Detection (TAAD)
framework that separates input variables into system parameters and
measurements, employing two domain adaptation modules to independently adapt to
each input category. This method allows for effective adaptation to evolving
operating conditions and is particularly beneficial in systems with scarce data.
Our approach, tested on a real-world pump monitoring dataset, shows significant
improvements over existing domain adaptation methods in fault detection,
demonstrating enhanced accuracy and reliability.
