Title: Enhancing Differential Testing With LLMs For Testing Deep Learning Libraries
Authors: Meiziniu Li, Dongze Li, Jianmeng Liu, Jialun Cao, Yongqiang Tian et al.
ID: 2406.07944
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.07944

Abstract:
Differential testing offers a promising strategy to alleviate the test oracle
problem by comparing the test results between alternative implementations.
However, existing differential testing techniques for deep learning (DL)
libraries are limited by the key challenges of finding alternative
implementations (called counterparts) for a given API and subsequently
generating diverse test inputs. To address the two challenges, this paper
introduces DLLens, an LLM-enhanced differential testing technique for DL
libraries. To address the first challenge, DLLens incorporates an LLM-based
counterpart synthesis workflow, with the insight that the counterpart of a given
DL library API's computation could be successfully synthesized through certain
composition and adaptation of the APIs from another DL library. To address the
second challenge, DLLens incorporates a static analysis technique that extracts
the path constraints from the implementations of a given API and its counterpart
to guide diverse test input generation. The extraction is facilitated by LLM's
knowledge of the concerned DL library and its upstream libraries. We evaluate
DLLens on two popular DL libraries, TensorFlow and PyTorch. Our evaluation shows
that DLLens synthesizes counterparts for 1.84 times as many APIs as those found
by state-of-the-art techniques on these libraries. Moreover, under the same time
budget, DLLens covers 7.23% more branches and detects 1.88 times as many bugs as
state-of-the-art techniques on 200 randomly sampled APIs. DLLens has
successfully detected 71 bugs in recent TensorFlow and PyTorch libraries. Among
them, 59 are confirmed by developers, including 46 confirmed as previously
unknown bugs, and 10 of these previously unknown bugs have been fixed in the
latest version of TensorFlow and PyTorch.
