Title: Automated Trustworthiness Testing for Machine Learning Classifiers
Authors: Steven Cho, Seaton Cousins-Baxter, Stefano Ruberto, Valerio Terragni
ID: 2406.05251
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.05251

Abstract:
Machine Learning (ML) has become an integral part of our society, commonly used
in critical domains such as finance, healthcare, and transportation. Therefore,
it is crucial to evaluate not only whether ML models make correct predictions
but also whether they do so for the correct reasons, ensuring our trust that
will perform well on unseen data. This concept is known as trustworthiness in
ML. Recently, explainable techniques (e.g., LIME, SHAP) have been developed to
interpret the decision-making processes of ML models, providing explanations for
their predictions (e.g., words in the input that influenced the prediction the
most). Assessing the plausibility of these explanations can enhance our
confidence in the models' trustworthiness. However, current approaches typically
rely on human judgment to determine the plausibility of these explanations. This
paper proposes TOWER, the first technique to automatically create
trustworthiness oracles that determine whether text classifier predictions are
trustworthy. It leverages word embeddings to automatically evaluate the
trustworthiness of a model-agnostic text classifiers based on the outputs of
explanatory techniques. Our hypothesis is that a prediction is trustworthy if
the words in its explanation are semantically related to the predicted class. We
perform unsupervised learning with untrustworthy models obtained from noisy data
to find the optimal configuration of TOWER. We then evaluated TOWER on a
human-labeled trustworthiness dataset that we created. The results show that
TOWER can detect a decrease in trustworthiness as noise increases, but is not
effective when evaluated against the human-labeled dataset. Our initial
experiments suggest that our hypothesis is valid and promising, but further
research is needed to better understand the relationship between explanations
and trustworthiness issues.
