Title: A Review of AI and Machine Learning Contribution in Predictive Business Process Management (Process Enhancement and Process Improvement Approaches)
Authors: Mostafa Abbasi, Rahnuma Islam Nishat, Corey Bond, John Brandon Graham-Knight, Patricia Lasserre et al.
ID: 2407.11043
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.11043

Abstract:
Purpose- The significance of business processes has fostered a close
collaboration between academia and industry. Moreover, the business landscape
has witnessed continuous transformation, closely intertwined with technological
advancements. Our main goal is to offer researchers and process analysts
insights into the latest developments concerning Artificial Intelligence (AI)
and Machine Learning (ML) to optimize their processes in an organization and
identify research gaps and future directions in the field.
Design/methodology/approach- In this study, we perform a systematic review of
academic literature to investigate the integration of AI/ML in business process
management (BPM). We categorize the literature according to the BPM life-cycle
and employ bibliometric and objective-oriented methodology, to analyze related
papers. Findings- In business process management and process map, AI/ML has made
significant improvements using operational data on process metrics. These
developments involve two distinct stages: (1) process enhancement, which
emphasizes analyzing process information and adding descriptions to process
models, and (2) process improvement, which focuses on redesigning processes
based on insights derived from analysis. Research limitations/implications-
While this review paper serves to provide an overview of different approaches
for addressing process-related challenges, it does not delve deeply into the
intricacies of fine-grained technical details of each method. This work focuses
on recent papers conducted between 2010 and 2024. Originality/value- This paper
adopts a pioneering approach by conducting an extensive examination of the
integration of AI/ML techniques across the entire process management lifecycle.
Additionally, it presents groundbreaking research and introduces AI/ML-enabled
integrated tools, further enhancing the insights for future research.
