Title: Assessing invariance to affine transformations in image quality metrics
Authors: Nuria Alabau-Bosque, Paula Daudén-Oliver, Jorge Vila-Tomás, Valero Laparra, Jesús Malo
ID: 2407.17927
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.17927

Abstract:
Subjective image quality metrics are usually evaluated according to the
correlation with human opinion in databases with distortions that may appear in
digital media. However, these oversee affine transformations which may represent
better the changes in the images actually happening in natural conditions.
Humans can be particularly invariant to these natural transformations, as
opposed to the digital ones. In this work, we propose a methodology to evaluate
any image quality metric by assessing their invariance to affine
transformations, specifically: rotation, translation, scaling, and changes in
spectral illumination. Here, invariance refers to the fact that certain
distances should be neglected if their values are below a threshold. This is
what we call invisibility threshold of a metric. Our methodology consists of two
elements: (1) the determination of a visibility threshold in a subjective
representation common to every metric, and (2) a transduction from the distance
values of the metric and this common representation. This common representation
is based on subjective ratings of readily available image quality databases. We
determine the threshold in such common representation (the first element) using
accurate psychophysics. Then, the transduction (the second element) can be
trivially fitted for any metric: with the provided threshold extension of the
method to any metric is straightforward. We test our methodology with some
well-established metrics and find that none of them show human-like invisibility
thresholds. This means that tuning the models exclusively to predict the
visibility of generic distortions may disregard other properties of human vision
as for instance invariances or invisibility thresholds. The data and code are
publicly available to test other metrics.
