Title: TestART: Improving LLM-based Unit Testing via Co-evolution of Automated Generation and Repair Iteration
Authors: Siqi Gu, Quanjun Zhang, Kecheng Li, Chunrong Fang, Fangyuan Tian et al.
ID: 2408.03095
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.03095

Abstract:
Unit testing is crucial for detecting bugs in individual program units but
consumes time and effort. Recently, large language models (LLMs) have
demonstrated remarkable capabilities in generating unit test cases. However,
several problems limit their ability to generate high-quality unit test cases:
(1) compilation and runtime errors caused by the hallucination of LLMs; (2) lack
of testing and coverage feedback information restricting the increase of code
coverage;(3) the repetitive suppression problem causing invalid LLM-based repair
and generation attempts. To address these limitations, we propose TestART, a
novel unit test generation method. TestART improves LLM-based unit testing via
co-evolution of automated generation and repair iteration, representing a
significant advancement in automated unit test generation. TestART leverages the
template-based repair strategy to effectively fix bugs in LLM-generated test
cases for the first time. Meanwhile, TestART extracts coverage information from
successful test cases and uses it as coverage-guided testing feedback. It also
incorporates positive prompt injection to prevent repetition suppression,
thereby enhancing the sufficiency of the final test case. This synergy between
generation and repair elevates the correctness and sufficiency of the produced
test cases significantly beyond previous methods. In comparative experiments,
TestART demonstrates an 18% improvement in pass rate and a 20% enhancement in
coverage across three types of datasets compared to baseline models.
Additionally, it achieves better coverage rates than EvoSuite with only half the
number of test cases. These results demonstrate TestART's superior ability to
produce high-quality unit test cases by harnessing the power of LLMs while
overcoming their inherent flaws.
