Title: CIPHER: Cybersecurity Intelligent Penetration-testing Helper for Ethical Researcher
Authors: Derry Pratama, Naufal Suryanto, Andro Aprila Adiputra, Thi-Thu-Huong Le, Ahmada Yusril Kadiptya et al.
ID: 2408.11650
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.11650

Abstract:
Penetration testing, a critical component of cybersecurity, typically requires
extensive time and effort to find vulnerabilities. Beginners in this field often
benefit from collaborative approaches with the community or experts. To address
this, we develop CIPHER (Cybersecurity Intelligent Penetration-testing Helper
for Ethical Researchers), a large language model specifically trained to assist
in penetration testing tasks. We trained CIPHER using over 300 high-quality
write-ups of vulnerable machines, hacking techniques, and documentation of
open-source penetration testing tools. Additionally, we introduced the Findings,
Action, Reasoning, and Results (FARR) Flow augmentation, a novel method to
augment penetration testing write-ups to establish a fully automated pentesting
simulation benchmark tailored for large language models. This approach fills a
significant gap in traditional cybersecurity Q\&A benchmarks and provides a
realistic and rigorous standard for evaluating AI's technical knowledge,
reasoning capabilities, and practical utility in dynamic penetration testing
scenarios. In our assessments, CIPHER achieved the best overall performance in
providing accurate suggestion responses compared to other open-source
penetration testing models of similar size and even larger state-of-the-art
models like Llama 3 70B and Qwen1.5 72B Chat, particularly on insane difficulty
machine setups. This demonstrates that the current capabilities of general LLMs
are insufficient for effectively guiding users through the penetration testing
process. We also discuss the potential for improvement through scaling and the
development of better benchmarks using FARR Flow augmentation results. Our
benchmark will be released publicly at https://github.com/ibndias/CIPHER.
