Title: A System for Automated Unit Test Generation Using Large Language Models and Assessment of Generated Test Suites
Authors: Andrea Lops, Fedelucio Narducci, Azzurra Ragone, Michelantonio Trizio, Claudio Bartolini
ID: 2408.07846
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.07846

Abstract:
Unit tests represent the most basic level of testing within the software testing
lifecycle and are crucial to ensuring software correctness. Designing and
creating unit tests is a costly and labor-intensive process that is ripe for
automation. Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have been applied to various
aspects of software development, including unit test generation. Although
several empirical studies evaluating LLMs' capabilities in test code generation
exist, they primarily focus on simple scenarios, such as the straightforward
generation of unit tests for individual methods. These evaluations often involve
independent and small-scale test units, providing a limited view of LLMs'
performance in real-world software development scenarios. Moreover, previous
studies do not approach the problem at a suitable scale for real-life
applications. Generated unit tests are often evaluated via manual integration
into the original projects, a process that limits the number of tests executed
and reduces overall efficiency. To address these gaps, we have developed an
approach for generating and evaluating more real-life complexity test suites.
Our approach focuses on class-level test code generation and automates the
entire process from test generation to test assessment. In this work, we present
AgoneTest: an automated system for generating test suites for Java projects and
a comprehensive and principled methodology for evaluating the generated test
suites. Starting from a state-of-the-art dataset (i.e., Methods2Test), we built
a new dataset for comparing human-written tests with those generated by LLMs.
Our key contributions include a scalable automated software system, a new
dataset, and a detailed methodology for evaluating test quality.
