Title: TestBench: Evaluating Class-Level Test Case Generation Capability of Large Language Models
Authors: Quanjun Zhang, Ye Shang, Chunrong Fang, Siqi Gu, Jianyi Zhou et al.
ID: 2409.17561
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.17561

Abstract:
Software testing is a crucial phase in the software life cycle, helping identify
potential risks and reduce maintenance costs. With the advancement of Large
Language Models (LLMs), researchers have proposed an increasing number of
LLM-based software testing techniques, particularly in the area of test case
generation. Despite the growing interest, limited efforts have been made to
thoroughly evaluate the actual capabilities of LLMs in this task. In this paper,
we introduce TestBench, a benchmark for class-level LLM-based test case
generation. We construct a dataset of 108 Java programs from 9 real-world,
large-scale projects on GitHub, each representing a different thematic domain.
We then design three distinct types of prompts based on context descriptions,
including self-contained context, full context, and simple context. Besides, we
propose a fine-grained evaluation framework that considers five aspects of test
cases: syntactic correctness, compilation correctness, test correctness, code
coverage rate, and defect detection rate. Furthermore, we propose a heuristic
algorithm to repair erroneous test cases generated by LLMs. We evaluate
CodeLlama-13b, GPT-3.5, and GPT-4 on the TestBench, and our experimental results
indicate that larger models demonstrate a greater ability to effectively utilize
contextual information, thus generating higher-quality test cases. Smaller
models may struggle with the noise introduced by the extensive information
contained within the full context. However, when using the simplified version,
namely the simple context, which is derived from the full context via abstract
syntax tree analysis, the performance of these models improves significantly.
Our analysis highlights the current progress and pinpoints future directions to
further enhance the effectiveness of models by handling contextual information
for test case generation.
