Title: LLM-based Unit Test Generation via Property Retrieval
Authors: Zhe Zhang, Xingyu Liu, Yuanzhang Lin, Xiang Gao, Hailong Sun et al.
ID: 2410.13542
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.13542

Abstract:
Automated unit test generation has been widely studied, with Large Language
Models (LLMs) recently showing significant potential. Moreover, in the context
of unit test generation, these tools prioritize high code coverage, often at the
expense of practical usability, correctness, and maintainability. In response,
we propose Property-Based Retrieval Augmentation, a novel mechanism that extends
LLM-based Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) beyond basic vector, text
similarity, and graph-based methods. Our approach considers task-specific
context and introduces a tailored property retrieval mechanism. Specifically, in
the unit test generation task, we account for the unique structure of unit tests
by dividing the test generation process into Given, When, and Then phases. When
generating tests for a focal method, we not only retrieve general context for
the code under test but also consider task-specific context such as pre-existing
tests of other methods, which can provide valuable insights for any of the
Given, When, and Then phases. This forms property relationships between focal
method and other methods, thereby expanding the scope of retrieval beyond
traditional RAG. We implement this approach in a tool called APT, which
sequentially performs preprocessing, property retrieval, and unit test
generation, using an iterative strategy where newly generated tests guide the
creation of subsequent ones. We evaluated APT on 12 open-source projects with
1515 methods, and the results demonstrate that APT consistently outperforms
existing tools in terms of correctness, completeness, and maintainability of the
generated tests. Moreover, we introduce a novel code-context-aware retrieval
mechanism for LLMs beyond general context, offering valuable insights and
potential applications for other code-related tasks.
