Title: Evaluating the Performance of a D-Wave Quantum Annealing System for Feature Subset Selection in Software Defect Prediction
Authors: Ashis Kumar Mandal, Md Nadim, Chanchal K. Roy, Banani Roy, Kevin A. Schneider
ID: 2410.16469
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.16469

Abstract:
Predicting software defects early in the development process not only enhances
the quality and reliability of the software but also decreases the cost of
development. A wide range of machine learning techniques can be employed to
create software defect prediction models, but the effectiveness and accuracy of
these models are often influenced by the choice of appropriate feature subset.
Since finding the optimal feature subset is computationally intensive, heuristic
and metaheuristic approaches are commonly employed to identify near-optimal
solutions within a reasonable time frame. Recently, the quantum computing
paradigm quantum annealing (QA) has been deployed to find solutions to complex
optimization problems. This opens up the possibility of addressing the feature
subset selection problem with a QA machine. Although several strategies have
been proposed for feature subset selection using a QA machine, little
exploration has been done regarding the viability of a QA machine for feature
subset selection in software defect prediction. This study investigates the
potential of D-Wave QA system for this task, where we formulate a mutual
information (MI)-based filter approach as an optimization problem and utilize a
D-Wave Quantum Processing Unit (QPU) solver as a QA solver for feature subset
selection. We evaluate the performance of this approach using multiple software
defect datasets from the AEEM, JIRA, and NASA projects. We also utilize a D-Wave
classical solver for comparative analysis. Our experimental results demonstrate
that QA-based feature subset selection can enhance software defect prediction.
Although the D-Wave QPU solver exhibits competitive prediction performance with
the classical solver in software defect prediction, it significantly reduces the
time required to identify the best feature subset compared to its classical
counterpart.
