Title: BanditCAT and AutoIRT: Machine Learning Approaches to Computerized Adaptive Testing and Item Calibration
Authors: James Sharpnack, Kevin Hao, Phoebe Mulcaire, Klinton Bicknell, Geoff LaFlair et al.
ID: 2410.21033
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.21033

Abstract:
In this paper, we present a complete framework for quickly calibrating and
administering a robust large-scale computerized adaptive test (CAT) with a small
number of responses. Calibration - learning item parameters in a test - is done
using AutoIRT, a new method that uses automated machine learning (AutoML) in
combination with item response theory (IRT), originally proposed in [Sharpnack
et al., 2024]. AutoIRT trains a non-parametric AutoML grading model using item
features, followed by an item-specific parametric model, which results in an
explanatory IRT model. In our work, we use tabular AutoML tools
(AutoGluon.tabular, [Erickson et al., 2020]) along with BERT embeddings and
linguistically motivated NLP features. In this framework, we use Bayesian
updating to obtain test taker ability posterior distributions for administration
and scoring. For administration of our adaptive test, we propose the BanditCAT
framework, a methodology motivated by casting the problem in the contextual
bandit framework and utilizing item response theory (IRT). The key insight lies
in defining the bandit reward as the Fisher information for the selected item,
given the latent test taker ability from IRT assumptions. We use Thompson
sampling to balance between exploring items with different psychometric
characteristics and selecting highly discriminative items that give more precise
information about ability. To control item exposure, we inject noise through an
additional randomization step before computing the Fisher information. This
framework was used to initially launch two new item types on the DET practice
test using limited training data. We outline some reliability and exposure
metrics for the 5 practice test experiments that utilized this framework.
