Title: AutoPenBench: Benchmarking Generative Agents for Penetration Testing
Authors: Luca Gioacchini, Marco Mellia, Idilio Drago, Alexander Delsanto, Giuseppe Siracusano et al.
ID: 2410.03225
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.03225

Abstract:
Generative AI agents, software systems powered by Large Language Models (LLMs),
are emerging as a promising approach to automate cybersecurity tasks. Among the
others, penetration testing is a challenging field due to the task complexity
and the diverse strategies to simulate cyber-attacks. Despite growing interest
and initial studies in automating penetration testing with generative agents,
there remains a significant gap in the form of a comprehensive and standard
framework for their evaluation and development. This paper introduces
AutoPenBench, an open benchmark for evaluating generative agents in automated
penetration testing. We present a comprehensive framework that includes 33
tasks, each representing a vulnerable system that the agent has to attack. Tasks
are of increasing difficulty levels, including in-vitro and real-world
scenarios. We assess the agent performance with generic and specific milestones
that allow us to compare results in a standardised manner and understand the
limits of the agent under test. We show the benefits of AutoPenBench by testing
two agent architectures: a fully autonomous and a semi-autonomous supporting
human interaction. We compare their performance and limitations. For example,
the fully autonomous agent performs unsatisfactorily achieving a 21% Success
Rate (SR) across the benchmark, solving 27% of the simple tasks and only one
real-world task. In contrast, the assisted agent demonstrates substantial
improvements, with 64% of SR. AutoPenBench allows us also to observe how
different LLMs like GPT-4o or OpenAI o1 impact the ability of the agents to
complete the tasks. We believe that our benchmark fills the gap with a standard
and flexible framework to compare penetration testing agents on a common ground.
We hope to extend AutoPenBench along with the research community by making it
available under https://github.com/lucagioacchini/auto-pen-bench.
