Title: Agent-based modeling for realistic reproduction of human mobility and contact behavior to evaluate test and isolation strategies in epidemic infectious disease spread
Authors: David Kerkmann, Sascha Korf, Khoa Nguyen, Daniel Abele, Alain Schengen et al.
ID: 2410.08050
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.08050

Abstract:
Agent-based models have proven to be useful tools in supporting decision-making
processes in different application domains. The advent of modern computers and
supercomputers has enabled these bottom-up approaches to realistically model
human mobility and contact behavior. The COVID-19 pandemic showcased the urgent
need for detailed and informative models that can answer research questions on
transmission dynamics. We present a sophisticated agent-based model to simulate
the spread of respiratory diseases. The model is highly modularized and can be
used on various scales, from a small collection of buildings up to cities or
countries. Although not being the focus of this paper, the model has undergone
performance engineering on a single core and provides an efficient intra- and
inter-simulation parallelization for time-critical decision-making processes. In
order to allow answering research questions on individual level resolution,
nonpharmaceutical intervention strategies such as face masks or venue closures
can be implemented for particular locations or agents. In particular, we allow
for sophisticated testing and isolation strategies to study the effects of
minimal-invasive infectious disease mitigation. With realistic human mobility
patterns for the region of Brunswick, Germany, we study the effects of different
interventions between March 1st and May 30, 2021 in the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Our
analyses suggest that symptom-independent testing has limited impact on the
mitigation of disease dynamics if the dark figure in symptomatic cases is high.
Furthermore, we found that quarantine length is more important than quarantine
efficiency but that, with sufficient symptomatic control, also short quarantines
can have a substantial effect.
