Title: Many-Objective Search-Based Coverage-Guided Automatic Test Generation for Deep Neural Networks
Authors: Dongcheng Li, W. Eric Wong, Hu Liu, Man Zhao
ID: 2411.01033
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.01033

Abstract:
To ensure the reliability of DNN systems and address the test generation problem
for neural networks, this paper proposes a fuzzing test generation technique
based on many-objective optimization algorithms. Traditional fuzz testing
employs random search, leading to lower testing efficiency and tends to generate
numerous invalid test cases. By utilizing many-objective optimization
techniques, effective test cases can be generated. To achieve high test
coverage, this paper proposes several improvement strategies. The
frequency-based fuzz sampling strategy assigns priorities based on the frequency
of selection of initial data, avoiding the repetitive selection of the same data
and enhancing the quality of initial data better than random sampling
strategies. To address the issue that global search may yield test not
satisfying semantic constraints, a local search strategy based on the Monte
Carlo tree search is proposed to enhance the algorithm's local search
capabilities. Furthermore, we improve the diversity of the population and the
algorithm's global search capability by updating SPEA2's external archive based
on a decomposition-based archiving strategy. To validate the effectiveness of
the proposed approach, experiments were conducted on several public datasets and
various neural network models. The results reveal that, compared to random and
clustering-based sampling, the frequency-based fuzz sampling strategy provides a
greater improvement in coverage rate in the later stages of iterations. On
complex networks like VGG16, the improved SPEA2 algorithm increased the coverage
rate by about 12% across several coverage metrics, and by approximately 40% on
LeNet series networks. The experimental results also indicates that the newly
generated test cases not only exhibit higher coverage rates but also generate
adversarial samples that reveal model errors.
