Title: A multidimensional measurement of photorealistic avatar quality of experience
Authors: Ross Cutler, Babak Naderi, Vishak Gopal, Dharmendar Palle
ID: 2411.09066
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.09066

Abstract:
Photorealistic avatars are human avatars that look, move, and talk like real
people. The performance of photorealistic avatars has significantly improved
recently based on objective metrics such as PSNR, SSIM, LPIPS, FID, and FVD.
However, recent photorealistic avatar publications do not provide subjective
tests of the avatars to measure human usability factors. We provide an open
source test framework to subjectively measure photorealistic avatar performance
in ten dimensions: realism, trust, comfortableness using, comfortableness
interacting with, appropriateness for work, creepiness, formality, affinity,
resemblance to the person, and emotion accuracy. Using telecommunication
scenarios, we show that the correlation of nine of these subjective metrics with
PSNR, SSIM, LPIPS, FID, and FVD is weak, and moderate for emotion accuracy. The
crowdsourced subjective test framework is highly reproducible and accurate when
compared to a panel of experts. We analyze a wide range of avatars from
photorealistic to cartoon-like and show that some photorealistic avatars are
approaching real video performance based on these dimensions. We also find that
for avatars above a certain level of realism, eight of these measured dimensions
are strongly correlated. This means that avatars that are not as realistic as
real video will have lower trust, comfortableness using, comfortableness
interacting with, appropriateness for work, formality, and affinity, and higher
creepiness compared to real video. In addition, because there is a strong linear
relationship between avatar affinity and realism, there is no uncanny valley
effect for photorealistic avatars in the telecommunication scenario. We suggest
several extensions of this test framework for future work and discuss design
implications for telecommunication systems. The test framework is available at
https://github.com/microsoft/P.910.
