Title: A Quality-Centric Framework for Generic Deepfake Detection
Authors: Wentang Song, Zhiyuan Yan, Yuzhen Lin, Taiping Yao, Changsheng Chen et al.
ID: 2411.05335
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.05335

Abstract:
Detecting AI-generated images, particularly deepfakes, has become increasingly
crucial, with the primary challenge being the generalization to previously
unseen manipulation methods. This paper tackles this issue by leveraging the
forgery quality of training data to improve the generalization performance of
existing deepfake detectors. Generally, the forgery quality of different
deepfakes varies: some have easily recognizable forgery clues, while others are
highly realistic. Existing works often train detectors on a mix of deepfakes
with varying forgery qualities, potentially leading detectors to short-cut the
easy-to-spot artifacts from low-quality forgery samples, thereby hurting
generalization performance. To tackle this issue, we propose a novel
quality-centric framework for generic deepfake detection, which is composed of a
Quality Evaluator, a low-quality data enhancement module, and a learning pacing
strategy that explicitly incorporates forgery quality into the training process.
Our framework is inspired by curriculum learning, which is designed to gradually
enable the detector to learn more challenging deepfake samples, starting with
easier samples and progressing to more realistic ones. We employ both static and
dynamic assessments to assess the forgery quality, combining their scores to
produce a final rating for each training sample. The rating score guides the
selection of deepfake samples for training, with higher-rated samples having a
higher probability of being chosen. Furthermore, we propose a novel frequency
data augmentation method specifically designed for low-quality forgery samples,
which helps to reduce obvious forgery traces and improve their overall realism.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed framework can be applied
plug-and-play to existing detection models and significantly enhance their
generalization performance in detection.
