Title: Human-Activity AGV Quality Assessment: A Benchmark Dataset and an Objective Evaluation Metric
Authors: Zhichao Zhang, Wei Sun, Xinyue Li, Yunhao Li, Qihang Ge et al.
ID: 2411.16619
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.16619

Abstract:
AI-driven video generation techniques have made significant progress in recent
years. However, AI-generated videos (AGVs) involving human activities often
exhibit substantial visual and semantic distortions, hindering the practical
application of video generation technologies in real-world scenarios. To address
this challenge, we conduct a pioneering study on human activity AGV quality
assessment, focusing on visual quality evaluation and the identification of
semantic distortions. First, we construct the AI-Generated Human activity Video
Quality Assessment (Human-AGVQA) dataset, consisting of 6,000 AGVs derived from
15 popular text-to-video (T2V) models using 400 text prompts that describe
diverse human activities. We conduct a subjective study to evaluate the human
appearance quality, action continuity quality, and overall video quality of
AGVs, and identify semantic issues of human body parts. Based on Human-AGVQA, we
benchmark the performance of T2V models and analyze their strengths and
weaknesses in generating different categories of human activities. Second, we
develop an objective evaluation metric, named AI-Generated Human activity Video
Quality metric (GHVQ), to automatically analyze the quality of human activity
AGVs. GHVQ systematically extracts human-focused quality features, AI-generated
content-aware quality features, and temporal continuity features, making it a
comprehensive and explainable quality metric for human activity AGVs. The
extensive experimental results show that GHVQ outperforms existing quality
metrics on the Human-AGVQA dataset by a large margin, demonstrating its efficacy
in assessing the quality of human activity AGVs. The Human-AGVQA dataset and
GHVQ metric will be released at https://github.com/zczhang-sjtu/GHVQ.git.
