Title: Generating Critical Scenarios for Testing Automated Driving Systems
Authors: Trung-Hieu Nguyen, Truong-Giang Vuong, Hong-Nam Duong, Son Nguyen, Hieu Dinh Vo et al.
ID: 2412.02574
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.02574

Abstract:
Autonomous vehicles (AVs) have demonstrated significant potential in
revolutionizing transportation, yet ensuring their safety and reliability
remains a critical challenge, especially when exposed to dynamic and
unpredictable environments. Real-world testing of an Autonomous Driving System
(ADS) is both expensive and risky, making simulation-based testing a preferred
approach. In this paper, we propose AVASTRA, a Reinforcement Learning (RL)-based
approach to generate realistic critical scenarios for testing ADSs in simulation
environments. To capture the complexity of driving scenarios, AVASTRA
comprehensively represents the environment by both the internal states of an ADS
under-test (e.g., the status of the ADS's core components, speed, or
acceleration) and the external states of the surrounding factors in the
simulation environment (e.g., weather, traffic flow, or road condition). AVASTRA
trains the RL agent to effectively configure the simulation environment that
places the AV in dangerous situations and potentially leads it to collisions. We
introduce a diverse set of actions that allows the RL agent to systematically
configure both environmental conditions and traffic participants. Additionally,
based on established safety requirements, we enforce heuristic constraints to
ensure the realism and relevance of the generated test scenarios. AVASTRA is
evaluated on two popular simulation maps with four different road
configurations. Our results show AVASTRA's ability to outperform the
state-of-the-art approach by generating 30% to 115% more collision scenarios.
Compared to the baseline based on Random Search, AVASTRA achieves up to 275%
better performance. These results highlight the effectiveness of AVASTRA in
enhancing the safety testing of AVs through realistic comprehensive critical
scenario generation.
