Title: A Large-scale Empirical Study on Fine-tuning Large Language Models for Unit Testing
Authors: Ye Shang, Quanjun Zhang, Chunrong Fang, Siqi Gu, Jianyi Zhou et al.
ID: 2412.16620
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.16620

Abstract:
Unit testing plays a pivotal role in software development, improving software
quality and reliability. However, generating effective test cases manually is
time-consuming, prompting interest in unit testing research. Recently, Large
Language Models (LLMs) have shown potential in various unit testing tasks,
including test generation, assertion generation, and test evolution, but
existing studies are limited in scope and lack a systematic evaluation of the
effectiveness of LLMs. To bridge this gap, we present a large-scale empirical
study on fine-tuning LLMs for unit testing. Our study involves three unit
testing tasks, five benchmarks, eight evaluation metrics, and 37 popular LLMs
across various architectures and sizes, consuming over 3,000 NVIDIA A100 GPU
hours. We focus on three key research questions: (1) the performance of LLMs
compared to state-of-the-art methods, (2) the impact of different factors on LLM
performance, and (3) the effectiveness of fine-tuning versus prompt engineering.
Our findings reveal that LLMs outperform existing state-of-the-art approaches on
all three unit testing tasks across nearly all metrics, highlighting the
potential of fine-tuning LLMs in unit testing tasks. Furthermore, large-scale,
decoder-only models achieve the best results across tasks, while encoder-decoder
models perform better under the same parameter scale. Additionally, the
comparison of the performance between fine-tuning and prompt engineering
approaches reveals the considerable potential capability of the prompt
engineering approach in unit testing tasks. We then discuss the concerned issues
on the test generation task, including data leakage issues, bug detection
capabilities, and metrics comparisons. Finally, we further pinpoint carious
practical guidelines for LLM-based approaches to unit testing tasks in the near
future.
