Title: Using Cooperative Co-evolutionary Search to Generate Metamorphic Test Cases for Autonomous Driving Systems
Authors: Hossein Yousefizadeh, Shenghui Gu, Lionel C. Briand, Ali Nasr
ID: 2412.03843
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.03843

Abstract:
Autonomous Driving Systems (ADSs) rely on Deep Neural Networks, allowing
vehicles to navigate complex, open environments. However, the unpredictability
of these scenarios highlights the need for rigorous system-level testing to
ensure safety, a task usually performed with a simulator in the loop. Though one
important goal of such testing is to detect safety violations, there are many
undesirable system behaviors, that may not immediately lead to violations, that
testing should also be focusing on, thus detecting more subtle problems and
enabling a finer-grained analysis. This paper introduces Cooperative
Co-evolutionary MEtamorphic test Generator for Autonomous systems (CoCoMEGA), a
novel automated testing framework aimed at advancing system-level safety
assessments of ADSs. CoCoMEGA combines Metamorphic Testing (MT) with a
search-based approach utilizing Cooperative Co-Evolutionary Algorithms (CCEA) to
efficiently generate a diverse set of test cases. CoCoMEGA emphasizes the
identification of test scenarios that present undesirable system behavior, that
may eventually lead to safety violations, captured by Metamorphic Relations
(MRs). When evaluated within the CARLA simulation environment on the Interfuser
ADS, CoCoMEGA consistently outperforms baseline methods, demonstrating enhanced
effectiveness and efficiency in generating severe, diverse MR violations and
achieving broader exploration of the test space. These results underscore
CoCoMEGA as a promising, more scalable solution to the inherent challenges in
ADS testing with a simulator in the loop. Future research directions may include
extending the approach to additional simulation platforms, applying it to other
complex systems, and exploring methods for further improving testing efficiency
such as surrogate modeling.
