Title: Deep Reinforcement Learning for Asset Allocation in US Equities
Authors: Miquel Noguer i Alonso, Sonam Srivastava
ID: 2010.04404
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.04404

Reinforcement learning is a machine learning approach concerned with solving
dynamic optimization problems in an almost model-free way by maximizing a reward
function in state and action spaces. This property makes it an exciting area of
research for financial problems. Asset allocation, where the goal is to obtain
the weights of the assets that maximize the rewards in a given state of the
market considering risk and transaction costs, is a problem easily framed using
a reinforcement learning framework. It is first a prediction problem for
expected returns and covariance matrix and then an optimization problem for
returns, risk, and market impact. Investors and financial researchers have been
working with approaches like mean-variance optimization, minimum variance, risk
parity, and equally weighted and several methods to make expected returns and
covariance matrices' predictions more robust. This paper demonstrates the
application of reinforcement learning to create a financial model-free solution
to the asset allocation problem, learning to solve the problem using time series
and deep neural networks. We demonstrate this on daily data for the top 24
stocks in the US equities universe with daily rebalancing. We use a deep
reinforcement model on US stocks using different architectures. We use Long
Short Term Memory networks, Convolutional Neural Networks, and Recurrent Neural
Networks and compare them with more traditional portfolio management. The Deep
Reinforcement Learning approach shows better results than traditional approaches
using a simple reward function and only being given the time series of stocks.
In Finance, no training to test error generalization results come guaranteed. We
can say that the modeling framework can deal with time series prediction and
asset allocation, including transaction costs.
