Title: What Is an App Store? The Software Engineering Perspective
Authors: Wenhan Zhu, Sebastian Proksch, Daniel M. German, Michael W. Godfrey, Li Li et al.
ID: 2401.04287
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.04287

Abstract:
"App stores" are online software stores where end users may browse, purchase,
download, and install software applications. By far, the best known app stores
are associated with mobile platforms, such as Google Play for Android and
Apple's App Store for iOS. The ubiquity of smartphones has led to mobile app
stores becoming a touchstone experience of modern living. However, most of app
store research has concentrated on properties of the apps rather than the stores
themselves. Today, there is a rich diversity of app stores and these stores have
largely been overlooked by researchers: app stores exist on many distinctive
platforms, are aimed at different classes of users, and have different end-goals
beyond simply selling a standalone app to a smartphone user. We survey and
characterize the broader dimensionality of app stores, and explore how and why
they influence software development practices, such as system design and release
management. We begin by collecting a set of app store examples from web search
queries. By analyzing and curating the results, we derive a set of features
common to app stores. We then build a dimensional model of app stores based on
these features, and we fit each app store from our web search result set into
this model. Next, we performed unsupervised clustering to the app stores to find
their natural groupings. Our results suggest that app stores have become an
essential stakeholder in modern software development. They control the
distribution channel to end users and ensure that the applications are of
suitable quality; in turn, this leads to developers adhering to various store
guidelines when creating their applications. However, we found the app stores
operational model could vary widely between stores, and this variability could
in turn affect the generalizability of existing understanding of app stores.
