Title: Incentivizing Secure Software Development: the Role of Voluntary Audit and Liability Waiver
Authors: Ziyuan Huang, Gergely Biczók, Mingyan Liu
ID: 2401.08476
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.08476

Abstract:
Misaligned incentives in secure software development have long been the focus of
research in the economics of security. Product liability, a powerful legal
framework in other industries, has been largely ineffective for software
products until recent times. However, the rapid regulatory responses to recent
global cyber attacks by both the United States and the European Union, together
with the (relative) success of the General Data Protection Regulation in
defining both duty and standard of care for software vendors, may enable
regulators to use liability to re-align incentives for the benefit of the
digital society. Specifically, the recent United States National Cybersecurity
Strategy suggests shifting responsibility for cyber incidents back to software
vendors. In doing so, the strategy also puts forward the concept of the
liability waiver: if a software company voluntarily undergoes and passes an IT
security audit, its future product liability is (fully or partially) waived. In
this paper, we analyze this audit scenario from the perspective of the software
vendor and the auditor, respectively. From the vendor's view, this is formulated
as a sequential decision problem: a vendor with a product or process needs to
pass a mandatory audit to release the product onto the market; it is allowed to
go through the audit repeatedly, and thus the vendor needs to determine what
level of effort to put into the product following each failed test. We show that
the optimal strategy for an opt-in vendor is to never quit and to exert
cumulative investments in either a ``one-and-done'' or ``incremental'' manner.
From the auditor's view, we examine what type of audit might be the most
effective in incentivizing voluntary participation and, at the same time, a more
desirable effort from the vendor. We also showed how dynamic audits can be
exploited to increase the vendor's incentivizable investment.
