Title: Game Rewards Vulnerabilities: Software Vulnerability Detection with Zero-Sum Game and Prototype Learning
Authors: Xin-Cheng Wen, Cuiyun Gao, Xinchen Wang, Ruiqi Wang, Tao Zhang et al.
ID: 2401.08131
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.08131

Abstract:
Recent years have witnessed a growing focus on automated software vulnerability
detection. Notably, deep learning (DL)-based methods, which employ source code
for the implicit acquisition of vulnerability patterns, have demonstrated
superior performance compared to other approaches. However, the DL-based
approaches are still hard to capture the vulnerability-related information from
the whole code snippet, since the vulnerable parts usually account for only a
small proportion. As evidenced by our experiments, the approaches tend to
excessively emphasize semantic information, potentially leading to limited
vulnerability detection performance in practical scenarios. First, they cannot
well distinguish between the code snippets before (i.e., vulnerable code) and
after (i.e., non-vulnerable code) developers' fixes due to the minimal code
changes. Besides, substituting user-defined identifiers with placeholders (e.g.,
"VAR1" and "FUN1") in obvious performance degradation at up to 14.53% with
respect to the F1 score. To mitigate these issues, we propose to leverage the
vulnerable and corresponding fixed code snippets, in which the minimal changes
can provide hints about semantic-agnostic features for vulnerability detection.
In this paper, we propose a software vulneRability dEteCtion framework with
zerO-sum game and prototype learNing, named RECON. In RECON, we propose a
zero-sum game construction module. Distinguishing the vulnerable code from the
corresponding fixed code is regarded as one player (i.e. Calibrator), while the
conventional vulnerability detection is another player (i.e. Detector) in the
zero-sum game. The goal is to capture the semantic-agnostic features of the
first player for enhancing the second player's performance for vulnerability
detection. Experiments on the public benchmark dataset show that RECON
outperforms the state-of-the-art baseline by 6.29% in F1 score.
