Title: SpecGen: Automated Generation of Formal Program Specifications via Large Language Models
Authors: Lezhi Ma, Shangqing Liu, Yi Li, Xiaofei Xie, Lei Bu
ID: 2401.08807
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.08807

Abstract:
Formal program specifications play a crucial role in various stages of software
development. However, manually crafting formal program specifications is rather
difficult, making the job time-consuming and labor-intensive. It is even more
challenging to write specifications that correctly and comprehensively describe
the semantics of complex programs. To reduce the burden on software developers,
automated specification generation methods have emerged. However, existing
methods usually rely on predefined templates or grammar, making them struggle to
accurately describe the behavior and functionality of complex real-world
programs. To tackle this challenge, we introduce SpecGen, a novel technique for
formal program specification generation based on Large Language Models. Our key
insight is to overcome the limitations of existing methods by leveraging the
code comprehension capability of LLMs. The process of SpecGen consists of two
phases. The first phase employs a conversational approach that guides the LLM to
generate appropriate specifications for a given program. The second phase,
designed for where the LLM fails to generate correct specifications, applies
four mutation operators to the model-generated specifications and selects
verifiable specifications from the mutated ones through a novel heuristic
selection strategy. We evaluate SpecGen on two datasets, including the SV-COMP
Java category benchmark and a manually constructed dataset. Experimental results
demonstrate that SpecGen succeeds in generating verifiable specifications for
279 out of 385 programs, outperforming the existing purely LLM-based approaches
and conventional specification generation tools like Houdini and Daikon. Further
investigations on the quality of generated specifications indicate that SpecGen
can comprehensively articulate the behaviors of the input program.
