Title: Safety and Performance, Why Not Both? Bi-Objective Optimized Model Compression against Heterogeneous Attacks Toward AI Software Deployment
Authors: Jie Zhu, Leye Wang, Xiao Han, Anmin Liu, Tao Xie
ID: 2401.00996
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.00996

Abstract:
The size of deep learning models in artificial intelligence (AI) software is
increasing rapidly, hindering the large-scale deployment on resource-restricted
devices (e.g., smartphones). To mitigate this issue, AI software compression
plays a crucial role, which aims to compress model size while keeping high
performance. However, the intrinsic defects in a big model may be inherited by
the compressed one. Such defects may be easily leveraged by adversaries, since a
compressed model is usually deployed in a large number of devices without
adequate protection. In this article, we aim to address the safe model
compression problem from the perspective of safety-performance co-optimization.
Specifically, inspired by the test-driven development (TDD) paradigm in software
engineering, we propose a test-driven sparse training framework called
SafeCompress. By simulating the attack mechanism as safety testing, SafeCompress
can automatically compress a big model to a small one following the dynamic
sparse training paradigm. Then, considering two kinds of representative and
heterogeneous attack mechanisms, i.e., black-box membership inference attack and
white-box membership inference attack, we develop two concrete instances called
BMIA-SafeCompress and WMIA-SafeCompress. Further, we implement another instance
called MMIA-SafeCompress by extending SafeCompress to defend against the
occasion when adversaries conduct black-box and white-box membership inference
attacks simultaneously. We conduct extensive experiments on five datasets for
both computer vision and natural language processing tasks. The results show the
effectiveness and generalizability of our framework. We also discuss how to
adapt SafeCompress to other attacks besides membership inference attack,
demonstrating the flexibility of SafeCompress.
