Title: Chronicles of CI/CD: A Deep Dive into its Usage Over Time
Authors: Hugo da Gião, André Flores, Rui Pereira, Jácome Cunha
ID: 2402.17588
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.17588

Abstract:
DevOps is a combination of methodologies and tools that improves the software
development, build, deployment, and monitoring processes by shortening its
lifecycle and improving software quality. Part of this process is CI/CD, which
embodies mostly the first parts, right up to the deployment. Despite the many
benefits of DevOps and CI/CD, it still presents many challenges promoted by the
tremendous proliferation of different tools, languages, and syntaxes, which
makes the field quite challenging to learn and keep up to date. Software
repositories contain data regarding various software practices, tools, and uses.
This data can help gather multiple insights that inform technical and academic
decision-making. GitHub is currently the most popular software hosting platform
and provides a search API that lets users query its repositories. Our goal with
this paper is to gain insights into the technologies developers use for CI/CD by
analyzing GitHub repositories. Using a list of the state-of-the-art CI/CD
technologies, we use the GitHub search API to find repositories using each of
these technologies. We also use the API to extract various insights regarding
those repositories. We then organize and analyze the data collected. From our
analysis, we provide an overview of the use of CI/CD technologies in our days,
but also what happened in the last 12 years. We also show developers use several
technologies simultaneously in the same project and that the change between
technologies is quite common. From these insights, we find several research
paths, from how to support the use of multiple technologies, both in terms of
techniques, but also in terms of human-computer interaction, to aiding
developers in evolving their CI/CD pipelines, again considering the various
dimensions of the problem.
