Title: A New Era in LLM Security: Exploring Security Concerns in Real-World LLM-based Systems
Authors: Fangzhou Wu, Ning Zhang, Somesh Jha, Patrick McDaniel, Chaowei Xiao
ID: 2402.18649
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.18649

Abstract:
Large Language Model (LLM) systems are inherently compositional, with individual
LLM serving as the core foundation with additional layers of objects such as
plugins, sandbox, and so on. Along with the great potential, there are also
increasing concerns over the security of such probabilistic intelligent systems.
However, existing studies on LLM security often focus on individual LLM, but
without examining the ecosystem through the lens of LLM systems with other
objects (e.g., Frontend, Webtool, Sandbox, and so on). In this paper, we
systematically analyze the security of LLM systems, instead of focusing on the
individual LLMs. To do so, we build on top of the information flow and formulate
the security of LLM systems as constraints on the alignment of the information
flow within LLM and between LLM and other objects. Based on this construction
and the unique probabilistic nature of LLM, the attack surface of the LLM system
can be decomposed into three key components: (1) multi-layer security analysis,
(2) analysis of the existence of constraints, and (3) analysis of the robustness
of these constraints. To ground this new attack surface, we propose a
multi-layer and multi-step approach and apply it to the state-of-art LLM system,
OpenAI GPT4. Our investigation exposes several security issues, not just within
the LLM model itself but also in its integration with other components. We found
that although the OpenAI GPT4 has designed numerous safety constraints to
improve its safety features, these safety constraints are still vulnerable to
attackers. To further demonstrate the real-world threats of our discovered
vulnerabilities, we construct an end-to-end attack where an adversary can
illicitly acquire the user's chat history, all without the need to manipulate
the user's input or gain direct access to OpenAI GPT4. Our demo is in the link:
https://fzwark.github.io/LLM-System-Attack-Demo/
