Title: Rampo: A CEGAR-based Integration of Binary Code Analysis and System Falsification for Cyber-Kinetic Vulnerability Detection
Authors: Kohei Tsujio, Mohammad Abdullah Al Faruque, Yasser Shoukry
ID: 2402.12642
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.12642

Abstract:
This paper presents a novel tool, named Rampo, that can perform binary code
analysis to identify cyber kinetic vulnerabilities in CPS. The tool takes as
input a Signal Temporal Logic (STL) formula that describes the kinetic effect,
i.e., the behavior of the physical system, that one wants to avoid. The tool
then searches the possible cyber trajectories in the binary code that may lead
to such physical behavior. This search integrates binary code analysis tools and
hybrid systems falsification tools using a Counter-Example Guided Abstraction
Refinement (CEGAR) approach. Rampo starts by analyzing the binary code to
extract symbolic constraints that represent the different paths in the code.
These symbolic constraints are then passed to a Satisfiability Modulo Theories
(SMT) solver to extract the range of control signals that can be produced by
each path in the code. The next step is to search over possible physical
trajectories using a hybrid systems falsification tool that adheres to the
behavior of the cyber paths and yet leads to violations of the STL formula.
Since the number of cyber paths that need to be explored increases exponentially
with the length of physical trajectories, we iteratively perform refinement of
the cyber path constraints based on the previous falsification result and
traverse the abstract path tree obtained from the control program to explore the
search space of the system. To illustrate the practical utility of binary code
analysis in identifying cyber kinetic vulnerabilities, we present case studies
from diverse CPS domains, showcasing how they can be discovered in their control
programs. Our tool could compute the same number of vulnerabilities while
leading to a speedup that ranges from 3x to 98x.
