Title: To Err is Machine: Vulnerability Detection Challenges LLM Reasoning
Authors: Benjamin Steenhoek, Md Mahbubur Rahman, Monoshi Kumar Roy, Mirza Sanjida Alam, Hengbo Tong et al.
ID: 2403.17218
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.17218

Abstract:
In this paper, we present a challenging code reasoning task: vulnerability
detection. Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown promising results in
natural-language and math reasoning, but state-of-the-art (SOTA) models reported
only 54.5% Balanced Accuracy in our vulnerability detection evaluation, even
those models pre-trained on large amounts of source code. Our error analysis on
LLM responses shows that the models struggle to reason about the code semantics
relevant to identifying vulnerabilities, especially subtle semantic differences
caused by small textual changes. We explored prominent models and training
settings to understand their effects on vulnerability detection performance --
including better prompts, larger models, more pre-training data, and fine-tuning
-- but none led to significant improvements. This raises the question of whether
simply scaling training data and model size will allow us to "solve" complex
code reasoning tasks like vulnerability detection, or if a fundamental shift in
modeling and training techniques is required. We also explored adding domain
knowledge to prompts; although it helped certain models understand some code
semantics, vulnerability detection requires multi-step reasoning, and these
models still failed in steps, such as reasoning about variable relations. Our
results suggest that new models, new training methods, or more
execution-specific pretraining data may be needed to conquer vulnerability
detection. We speculate that auto-regressive pre-training on source code may not
effectively extract code semantics, especially on the current pretraining
mixtures, in which execution data is scarce. Success on vulnerability detection
as a code reasoning task can benefit many areas of software engineering such as
debugging, test input generation, and program repair. Our code and data are
available at https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.27368025.
