Title: AssetHarvester: A Static Analysis Tool for Detecting Secret-Asset Pairs in Software Artifacts
Authors: Setu Kumar Basak, K. Virgil English, Ken Ogura, Vitesh Kambara, Bradley Reaves et al.
ID: 2403.19072
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.19072

Abstract:
GitGuardian monitored secrets exposure in public GitHub repositories and
reported that developers leaked over 12 million secrets (database and other
credentials) in 2023, indicating a 113% surge from 2021. Despite the
availability of secret detection tools, developers ignore the tools' reported
warnings because of false positives (25%-99%). However, each secret protects
assets of different values accessible through asset identifiers (a DNS name and
a public or private IP address). The asset information for a secret can aid
developers in filtering false positives and prioritizing secret removal from the
source code. However, existing secret detection tools do not provide the asset
information, thus presenting difficulty to developers in filtering secrets only
by looking at the secret value or finding the assets manually for each reported
secret. The goal of our study is to aid software practitioners in prioritizing
secrets removal by providing the assets information protected by the secrets
through our novel static analysis tool. We present AssetHarvester, a static
analysis tool to detect secret-asset pairs in a repository. Since the location
of the asset can be distant from where the secret is defined, we investigated
secret-asset co-location patterns and found four patterns. To identify the
secret-asset pairs of the four patterns, we utilized three approaches (pattern
matching, data flow analysis, and fast-approximation heuristics). We curated a
benchmark of 1,791 secret-asset pairs of four database types extracted from 188
public GitHub repositories to evaluate the performance of AssetHarvester.
AssetHarvester demonstrates precision of (97%), recall (90%), and F1-score (94%)
in detecting secret-asset pairs. Our findings indicate that data flow analysis
employed in AssetHarvester detects secret-asset pairs with 0% false positives
and aids in improving recall of secret detection tools.
