Title: IPSynth: Interprocedural Program Synthesis for Software Security Implementation
Authors: Ali Shokri, Ibrahim Jameel Mujhid, Mehdi Mirakhorli
ID: 2403.10836
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.10836

Abstract:
To implement important quality attributes of software such as architectural
security tactics, developers incorporate API of software frameworks, as building
blocks, to avoid re-inventing the wheel and improve their productivity. However,
this is a challenging and error-prone task, especially for novice programmers.
Despite the advances in the field of API-based program synthesis, the
state-of-the-art suffers from a twofold shortcoming when it comes to
architectural tactic implementation tasks. First, the specification of the
desired tactic must be explicitly expressed, which is out of the knowledge of
such programmers. Second, these approaches synthesize a block of code and leave
the task of breaking it down into smaller pieces, adding each piece to the
proper location in the code, and establishing correct dependencies between each
piece and its surrounding environment as well as the other pieces, to the
programmer. To mitigate these challenges, we introduce IPSynth, a novel
inter-procedural program synthesis approach that automatically learns the
specification of the tactic, synthesizes the tactic as inter-related code
snippets, and adds them to an existing code base. We extend our first-place
award-winning extended abstract recognized at the 36th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE'21) research competition
track. In this paper, we provide the details of the approach, present the
results of the experimental evaluation of IPSynth, and analyses and insights for
a more comprehensive exploration of the research topic. Moreover, we compare the
results of our approach to one of the most powerful code generator tools,
ChatGPT. Our results show that our approach can accurately locate corresponding
spots in the program, synthesize needed code snippets, add them to the program,
and outperform ChatGPT in inter-procedural tactic synthesis tasks.
