Title: Evaluation of NoSQL in the Energy Marketplace with GraphQL Optimization
Authors: Michael Howard
ID: 2403.04935
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.04935

Abstract:
The growing popularity of electric vehicles in the United States requires an
ever-expanding infrastructure of commercial DC fast charging stations. The U.S.
Department of Energy estimates 33,355 publicly available DC fast charging
stations as of September 2023. Range anxiety is an important impediment to the
adoption of electric vehicles and is even more relevant in underserved regions
in the country. The peer-to-peer energy marketplace helps fill the demand by
allowing private home and small business owners to rent their 240 Volt, level-2
charging facilities. The existing, publicly accessible outlets are wrapped with
a Cloud-connected microcontroller managing security and charging sessions. These
microcontrollers act as Edge devices communicating with a Cloud message broker,
while both buyer and seller users interact with the framework via a web-based
user interface. The database storage used by the marketplace framework is a key
component in both the cost of development and the performance that contributes
to the user experience. A traditional storage solution is the SQL database.
However, difficulty in scaling across multiple nodes and cost of its
server-based compute have resulted in a trend in the last 20 years towards other
NoSQL, serverless approaches. In this study, we evaluate the NoSQL vs. SQL
solutions through a comparison of Google Cloud Firestore and Cloud SQL MySQL
offerings. The comparison pits Google's serverless, document-model,
non-relational, NoSQL against the server-base, table-model, relational, SQL
service. The evaluation is based on query latency, flexibility/scalability, and
cost criteria. Through benchmarking and analysis of the architecture, we
determine whether Firestore can support the energy marketplace storage needs and
if the introduction of a GraphQL middleware layer can overcome its deficiencies.
