Title: Empirical Analysis on CI/CD Pipeline Evolution in Machine Learning Projects
Authors: Dhia Elhaq Rzig, Alaa Houerbi, Rahul Ghanshyam Chavan, Foyzul Hassan
ID: 2403.12199
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.12199

Abstract:
The growing popularity of machine learning (ML) and the integration of ML
components with other software artifacts has led to the use of continuous
integration and delivery (CI/CD) tools, such as Travis CI, GitHub Actions, etc.
that enable faster integration and testing for ML projects. Such CI/CD
configurations and services require synchronization during the life cycle of the
projects. Several works discussed how CI/CD configuration and services change
during their usage in traditional software systems. However, there is very
limited knowledge of how CI/CD configuration and services change in ML projects.
To fill this knowledge gap, this work presents the first empirical analysis of
how CI/CD configuration evolves for ML software systems. We manually analyzed
343 commits collected from 508 open-source ML projects to identify common CI/CD
configuration change categories in ML projects and devised a taxonomy of 14
co-changes in CI/CD and ML components. Moreover, we developed a CI/CD
configuration change clustering tool that identified frequent CI/CD
configuration change patterns in 15,634 commits. Furthermore, we measured the
expertise of ML developers who modify CI/CD configurations. Based on this
analysis, we found that 61.8% of commits include a change to the build policy
and minimal changes related to performance and maintainability compared to
general open-source projects. Additionally, the co-evolution analysis identified
that CI/CD configurations, in many cases, changed unnecessarily due to bad
practices such as the direct inclusion of dependencies and a lack of usage of
standardized testing frameworks. More practices were found through the change
patterns analysis consisting of using deprecated settings and reliance on a
generic build language. Finally, our developer's expertise analysis suggests
that experienced developers are more inclined to modify CI/CD configurations.
