Title: Enhancing Code Vulnerability Detection via Vulnerability-Preserving Data Augmentation
Authors: Shangqing Liu, Wei Ma, Jian Wang, Xiaofei Xie, Ruitao Feng et al.
ID: 2404.09599
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.09599

Abstract:
Source code vulnerability detection aims to identify inherent vulnerabilities to
safeguard software systems from potential attacks. Many prior studies overlook
diverse vulnerability characteristics, simplifying the problem into a binary
(0-1) classification task for example determining whether it is vulnerable or
not. This poses a challenge for a single deep learning-based model to
effectively learn the wide array of vulnerability characteristics. Furthermore,
due to the challenges associated with collecting large-scale vulnerability data,
these detectors often overfit limited training datasets, resulting in lower
model generalization performance. To address the aforementioned challenges, in
this work, we introduce a fine-grained vulnerability detector namely FGVulDet.
Unlike previous approaches, FGVulDet employs multiple classifiers to discern
characteristics of various vulnerability types and combines their outputs to
identify the specific type of vulnerability. Each classifier is designed to
learn type-specific vulnerability semantics. Additionally, to address the
scarcity of data for some vulnerability types and enhance data diversity for
learning better vulnerability semantics, we propose a novel
vulnerability-preserving data augmentation technique to augment the number of
vulnerabilities. Taking inspiration from recent advancements in graph neural
networks for learning program semantics, we incorporate a Gated Graph Neural
Network (GGNN) and extend it to an edge-aware GGNN to capture edge-type
information. FGVulDet is trained on a large-scale dataset from GitHub,
encompassing five different types of vulnerabilities. Extensive experiments
compared with static-analysis-based approaches and learning-based approaches
have demonstrated the effectiveness of FGVulDet.
