Title: On Developing an Artifact-based Approach to Regulatory Requirements Engineering
Authors: Oleksandr Kosenkov, Michael Unterkalmsteiner, Jannik Fischbach, Daniel Mendez, Davide Fucci et al.
ID: 2405.00415
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.00415

Abstract:
Context: Regulatory acts are a challenging source when eliciting, interpreting,
and analyzing requirements. Requirements engineers often need to involve legal
experts who, however, may often not be available. This raises the need for
approaches to regulatory Requirements Engineering (RE) covering and integrating
both legal and engineering perspectives. Problem: Regulatory RE approaches need
to capture and reflect both the elementary concepts and relationships from a
legal perspective and their seamless transition to concepts used to specify
software requirements. No existing approach considers explicating and managing
legal domain knowledge and engineering-legal coordination. Method: We conducted
focus group sessions with legal researchers to identify the core challenges to
establishing a regulatory RE approach. Based on our findings, we developed a
candidate solution and conducted a first conceptual validation to assess its
feasibility. Results: We introduce the first version of our Artifact Model for
Regulatory Requirements Engineering (AM4RRE) and its conceptual foundation. It
provides a blueprint for applying legal (modelling) concepts and
well-established RE concepts. Our initial results suggest that artifact-centric
RE can be applied to managing legal domain knowledge and engineering-legal
coordination. Conclusions: The focus groups that served as a basis for building
our model and the results from the expert validation both strengthen our
confidence that we already provide a valuable basis for systematically
integrating legal concepts into RE. This overcomes contemporary challenges to
regulatory RE and serves as a basis for exposure to critical discussions in the
community before continuing with the development of tool-supported extensions
and large-scale empirical evaluations in practice.
