Title: Simplicity within biological complexity
Authors: Natasa Przulj, Noel Malod-Dognin
ID: 2405.09595
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.09595

Abstract:
Heterogeneous, interconnected, systems-level, molecular data have become
increasingly available and key in precision medicine. We need to utilize them to
better stratify patients into risk groups, discover new biomarkers and targets,
repurpose known and discover new drugs to personalize medical treatment.
Existing methodologies are limited and a paradigm shift is needed to achieve
quantitative and qualitative breakthroughs. In this perspective paper, we survey
the literature and argue for the development of a comprehensive, general
framework for embedding of multi-scale molecular network data that would enable
their explainable exploitation in precision medicine in linear time. Network
embedding methods map nodes to points in low-dimensional space, so that
proximity in the learned space reflects the network's topology-function
relationships. They have recently achieved unprecedented performance on hard
problems of utilizing few omic data in various biomedical applications. However,
research thus far has been limited to special variants of the problems and data,
with the performance depending on the underlying topology-function network
biology hypotheses, the biomedical applications and evaluation metrics. The
availability of multi-omic data, modern graph embedding paradigms and compute
power call for a creation and training of efficient, explainable and
controllable models, having no potentially dangerous, unexpected behaviour, that
make a qualitative breakthrough. We propose to develop a general, comprehensive
embedding framework for multi-omic network data, from models to efficient and
scalable software implementation, and to apply it to biomedical informatics. It
will lead to a paradigm shift in computational and biomedical understanding of
data and diseases that will open up ways to solving some of the major
bottlenecks in precision medicine and other domains.
