Title: Continuous Urban Change Detection from Satellite Image Time Series with Temporal Feature Refinement and Multi-Task Integration
Authors: Sebastian Hafner, Heng Fang, Hossein Azizpour, Yifang Ban
ID: 2406.17458
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.17458

Abstract:
Urbanization advances at unprecedented rates, leading to negative environmental
and societal impacts. Remote sensing can help mitigate these effects by
supporting sustainable development strategies with accurate information on urban
growth. Deep learning-based methods have achieved promising urban change
detection results from optical satellite image pairs using convolutional neural
networks (ConvNets), transformers, and a multi-task learning setup. However,
bi-temporal methods are limited for continuous urban change detection, i.e., the
detection of changes in consecutive image pairs of satellite image time series
(SITS), as they fail to fully exploit multi-temporal data (> 2 images). Existing
multi-temporal change detection methods, on the other hand, collapse the
temporal dimension, restricting their ability to capture continuous urban
changes. Additionally, multi-task learning methods lack integration approaches
that combine change and segmentation outputs. To address these challenges, we
propose a continuous urban change detection framework incorporating two key
modules. The temporal feature refinement (TFR) module employs self-attention to
improve ConvNet-based multi-temporal building representations. The temporal
dimension is preserved in the TFR module, enabling the detection of continuous
changes. The multi-task integration (MTI) module utilizes Markov networks to
find an optimal building map time series based on segmentation and dense change
outputs. The proposed framework effectively identifies urban changes based on
high-resolution SITS acquired by the PlanetScope constellation (F1 score 0.551),
Gaofen-2 (F1 score 0.440), and WorldView-2 (F1 score 0.543). Moreover, our
experiments on three challenging datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed framework compared to bi-temporal and multi-temporal urban change
detection and segmentation methods.
