Title: PAGURI: a user experience study of creative interaction with text-to-music models
Authors: Francesca Ronchini, Luca Comanducci, Gabriele Perego, Fabio Antonacci
ID: 2407.04333
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.04333

Abstract:
In recent years, text-to-music models have been the biggest breakthrough in
automatic music generation. While they are unquestionably a showcase of
technological progress, it is not clear yet how they can be realistically
integrated into the artistic practice of musicians and music practitioners. This
paper aims to address this question via Prompt Audio Generation User Research
Investigation (PAGURI), a user experience study where we leverage recent
text-to-music developments to study how musicians and practitioners interact
with these systems, evaluating their satisfaction levels. We developed an online
tool through which users can generate music samples and/or apply recently
proposed personalization techniques based on fine-tuning to allow the
text-to-music model to generate sounds closer to their needs and preferences.
Using semi-structured interviews, we analyzed different aspects related to how
participants interacted with the proposed tool to understand the current
effectiveness and limitations of text-to-music models in enhancing users'
creativity. Our research centers on user experiences to uncover insights that
can guide the future development of TTM models and their role in AI-driven music
creation. Additionally, they offered insightful perspectives on potential system
improvements and their integration into their music practices. The results
obtained through the study reveal the pros and cons of the use of TTMs for
creative endeavors. Participants recognized the system's creative potential and
appreciated the usefulness of its personalization features. However, they also
identified several challenges that must be addressed before TTMs are ready for
real-world music creation, particularly issues of prompt ambiguity, limited
controllability, and integration into existing workflows.
