Title: Industrial Practices of Requirements Engineering for ML-Enabled Systems in Brazil
Authors: Antonio Pedro Santos Alves, Marcos Kalinowski, Daniel Mendez, Hugo Villamizar, Kelly Azevedo et al.
ID: 2407.18977
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.18977

Abstract:
[Context] In Brazil, 41% of companies use machine learning (ML) to some extent.
However, several challenges have been reported when engineering ML-enabled
systems, including unrealistic customer expectations and vagueness in ML problem
specifications. Literature suggests that Requirements Engineering (RE) practices
and tools may help to alleviate these issues, yet there is insufficient
understanding of RE's practical application and its perception among
practitioners. [Goal] This study aims to investigate the application of RE in
developing ML-enabled systems in Brazil, creating an overview of current
practices, perceptions, and problems in the Brazilian industry. [Method] To this
end, we extracted and analyzed data from an international survey focused on
ML-enabled systems, concentrating specifically on responses from practitioners
based in Brazil. We analyzed RE-related answers gathered from 72 practitioners
involved in data-driven projects. We conducted quantitative statistical analyses
on contemporary practices using bootstrapping with confidence intervals and
qualitative studies on the reported problems involving open and axial coding
procedures. [Results] Our findings highlight distinct RE implementation aspects
in Brazil's ML projects. For instance, (i) RE-related tasks are predominantly
conducted by data scientists; (ii) the most common techniques for eliciting
requirements are interviews and workshop meetings; (iii) there is a prevalence
of interactive notebooks in requirements documentation; (iv) practitioners
report problems that include a poor understanding of the problem to solve and
the business domain, low customer engagement, and difficulties managing
stakeholders expectations. [Conclusion] These results provide an understanding
of RE-related practices in the Brazilian ML industry, helping to guide research
toward improving the maturity of RE for ML-enabled systems.
