Title: Agentless: Demystifying LLM-based Software Engineering Agents
Authors: Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yinlin Deng, Soren Dunn, Lingming Zhang
ID: 2407.01489
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.01489

Abstract:
Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have significantly advanced
the automation of software development tasks, including code synthesis, program
repair, and test generation. More recently, researchers and industry
practitioners have developed various autonomous LLM agents to perform end-to-end
software development tasks. These agents are equipped with the ability to use
tools, run commands, observe feedback from the environment, and plan for future
actions. However, the complexity of these agent-based approaches, together with
the limited abilities of current LLMs, raises the following question: Do we
really have to employ complex autonomous software agents? To attempt to answer
this question, we build Agentless -- an agentless approach to automatically
solve software development problems. Compared to the verbose and complex setup
of agent-based approaches, Agentless employs a simplistic three-phase process of
localization, repair, and patch validation, without letting the LLM decide
future actions or operate with complex tools. Our results on the popular
SWE-bench Lite benchmark show that surprisingly the simplistic Agentless is able
to achieve both the highest performance (32.00%, 96 correct fixes) and low cost
($0.70) compared with all existing open-source software agents! Furthermore, we
manually classified the problems in SWE-bench Lite and found problems with exact
ground truth patch or insufficient/misleading issue descriptions. As such, we
construct SWE-bench Lite-S by excluding such problematic issues to perform more
rigorous evaluation and comparison. Our work highlights the current overlooked
potential of a simple, interpretable technique in autonomous software
development. We hope Agentless will help reset the baseline, starting point, and
horizon for autonomous software agents, and inspire future work along this
crucial direction.
