Title: Vulnerabilities in AI-generated Image Detection: The Challenge of Adversarial Attacks
Authors: Yunfeng Diao, Naixin Zhai, Changtao Miao, Zitong Yu, Xingxing Wei et al.
ID: 2407.20836
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.20836

Abstract:
Recent advancements in image synthesis, particularly with the advent of GAN and
Diffusion models, have amplified public concerns regarding the dissemination of
disinformation. To address such concerns, numerous AI-generated Image (AIGI)
Detectors have been proposed and achieved promising performance in identifying
fake images. However, there still lacks a systematic understanding of the
adversarial robustness of AIGI detectors. In this paper, we examine the
vulnerability of state-of-the-art AIGI detectors against adversarial attack
under white-box and black-box settings, which has been rarely investigated so
far. To this end, we propose a new method to attack AIGI detectors. First,
inspired by the obvious difference between real images and fake images in the
frequency domain, we add perturbations under the frequency domain to push the
image away from its original frequency distribution. Second, we explore the full
posterior distribution of the surrogate model to further narrow this gap between
heterogeneous AIGI detectors, e.g., transferring adversarial examples across
CNNs and ViTs. This is achieved by introducing a novel post-train Bayesian
strategy that turns a single surrogate into a Bayesian one, capable of
simulating diverse victim models using one pre-trained surrogate, without the
need for re-training. We name our method as Frequency-based Post-train Bayesian
Attack, or FPBA. Through FPBA, we demonstrate that adversarial attacks pose a
real threat to AIGI detectors. FPBA can deliver successful black-box attacks
across various detectors, generators, defense methods, and even evade
cross-generator and compressed image detection, which are crucial real-world
detection scenarios. Our code is available at https://github.com/onotoa/fpba.
