Title: Unraveling Radiomics Complexity: Strategies for Optimal Simplicity in Predictive Modeling
Authors: Mahdi Ait Lhaj Loutfi, Teodora Boblea Podasca, Alex Zwanenburg, Taman Upadhaya, Jorge Barrios et al.
ID: 2407.04888
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.04888

Abstract:
Background: The high dimensionality of radiomic feature sets, the variability in
radiomic feature types and potentially high computational requirements all
underscore the need for an effective method to identify the smallest set of
predictive features for a given clinical problem. Purpose: Develop a methodology
and tools to identify and explain the smallest set of predictive radiomic
features. Materials and Methods: 89,714 radiomic features were extracted from
five cancer datasets: low-grade glioma, meningioma, non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), and two renal cell carcinoma cohorts (n=2104). Features were
categorized by computational complexity into morphological, intensity, texture,
linear filters, and nonlinear filters. Models were trained and evaluated on each
complexity level using the area under the curve (AUC). The most informative
features were identified, and their importance was explained. The optimal
complexity level and associated most informative features were identified using
systematic statistical significance analyses and a false discovery avoidance
procedure, respectively. Their predictive importance was explained using a novel
tree-based method. Results: MEDimage, a new open-source tool, was developed to
facilitate radiomic studies. Morphological features were optimal for MRI-based
meningioma (AUC: 0.65) and low-grade glioma (AUC: 0.68). Intensity features were
optimal for CECT-based renal cell carcinoma (AUC: 0.82) and CT-based NSCLC (AUC:
0.76). Texture features were optimal for MRI-based renal cell carcinoma (AUC:
0.72). Tuning the Hounsfield unit range improved results for CECT-based renal
cell carcinoma (AUC: 0.86). Conclusion: Our proposed methodology and software
can estimate the optimal radiomics complexity level for specific medical
outcomes, potentially simplifying the use of radiomics in predictive modeling
across various contexts.
