Title: The Elephant in the Room: Software and Hardware Security Vulnerabilities of Portable Sequencing Devices
Authors: Carson Stillman, Jonathan E. Bravo, Christina Boucher, Sara Rampazzi
ID: 2407.12001
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.12001

Abstract:
Portable genome sequencing technology is revolutionizing genomic research by
providing a faster, more flexible method of sequencing DNA and RNA [1, 2]. The
unprecedented shift from bulky stand-alone benchtop equipment confined in a
laboratory setting to small portable devices which can be easily carried
anywhere outside the laboratory network and connected to untrusted external
computers to perform sequencing raises new security and privacy threats not
considered before. Current research primarily addresses the privacy of DNA/RNA
data in online databases [3] and the security of stand-alone sequencing devices
such as Illumina [4]. However, it overlooks the security risks arising from
compromises of computer devices directly connected to portable sequencers as
illustrated in Fig. 1. While highly sensitive data, such as the human genome,
has become easier to sequence, the networks connecting to these smaller devices
and the hardware running basecalling can no longer implicitly be trusted, and
doing so can deteriorate the confidentiality and integrity of the genomic data
being processed. Here, we present new security and privacy threats of portable
sequencing technology and recommendations to aid in ensuring sequencing data is
kept private and secure. First, to prevent unauthorized access to sequencing
devices, IP addresses should not be considered a sufficient authentication
mechanism. Second, integrity checks are necessary for all data passed from the
sequencer to external computers to avoid data manipulation. Finally, encryption
should be considered as data is passed from the sequencer to such external
computers to prevent eavesdropping on data as it is sent and stored. As devices
and technology rapidly change, it becomes paramount to reevaluate security
requirements alongside them or risk leaving some of our most sensitive data
exposed.
