Title: Insights on Microservice Architecture Through the Eyes of Industry Practitioners
Authors: Vinicius L. Nogueira, Fernando S. Felizardo, Aline M. M. M. Amaral, Wesley K. G. Assuncao, Thelma E. Colanzi
ID: 2408.10434
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.10434

Abstract:
The adoption of microservice architecture has seen a considerable upswing in
recent years, mainly driven by the need to modernize legacy systems and address
their limitations. Legacy systems, typically designed as monolithic
applications, often struggle with maintenance, scalability, and deployment
inefficiencies. This study investigates the motivations, activities, and
challenges associated with migrating from monolithic legacy systems to
microservices, aiming to shed light on common practices and challenges from a
practitioner's point of view. We conducted a comprehensive study with 53
software practitioners who use microservices, expanding upon previous research
by incorporating diverse international perspectives. Our mixed-methods approach
includes quantitative and qualitative analyses, focusing on four main aspects:
(i) the driving forces behind migration, (ii) the activities to conduct the
migration, (iii) strategies for managing data consistency, and (iv) the
prevalent challenges. Thus, our results reveal diverse practices and challenges
practitioners face when migrating to microservices. Companies are interested in
technical benefits, enhancing maintenance, scalability, and deployment
processes. Testing in microservice environments remains complex, and extensive
monitoring is crucial to managing the dynamic nature of microservices. Database
management remains challenging. While most participants prefer decentralized
databases for autonomy and scalability, challenges persist in ensuring data
consistency. Additionally, many companies leverage modern cloud technologies to
mitigate network overhead, showcasing the importance of cloud infrastructure in
facilitating efficient microservice communication.
