Title: A Qualitative Study on Using ChatGPT for Software Security: Perception vs. Practicality
Authors: M. Mehdi Kholoosi, M. Ali Babar, Roland Croft
ID: 2408.00435
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.00435

Abstract:
Artificial Intelligence (AI) advancements have enabled the development of Large
Language Models (LLMs) that can perform a variety of tasks with remarkable
semantic understanding and accuracy. ChatGPT is one such LLM that has gained
significant attention due to its impressive capabilities for assisting in
various knowledge-intensive tasks. Due to the knowledge-intensive nature of
engineering secure software, ChatGPT's assistance is expected to be explored for
security-related tasks during the development/evolution of software. To gain an
understanding of the potential of ChatGPT as an emerging technology for
supporting software security, we adopted a two-fold approach. Initially, we
performed an empirical study to analyse the perceptions of those who had
explored the use of ChatGPT for security tasks and shared their views on
Twitter. It was determined that security practitioners view ChatGPT as
beneficial for various software security tasks, including vulnerability
detection, information retrieval, and penetration testing. Secondly, we designed
an experiment aimed at investigating the practicality of this technology when
deployed as an oracle in real-world settings. In particular, we focused on
vulnerability detection and qualitatively examined ChatGPT outputs for given
prompts within this prominent software security task. Based on our analysis,
responses from ChatGPT in this task are largely filled with generic security
information and may not be appropriate for industry use. To prevent data
leakage, we performed this analysis on a vulnerability dataset compiled after
the OpenAI data cut-off date from real-world projects covering 40 distinct
vulnerability types and 12 programming languages. We assert that the findings
from this study would contribute to future research aimed at developing and
evaluating LLMs dedicated to software security.
