Title: Comparison of Code Quality and Best Practices in IoT and non-IoT Software
Authors: Nour Khezemi, Sikandar Ejaza, Naouel Moha, Yann-Gaël Guéhéneuc
ID: 2408.02614
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.02614

Abstract:
Context: IoT systems, networks of connected devices powered by software, require
studying software quality for maintenance. Despite extensive studies on non-IoT
software quality, research on IoT software quality is lacking. It is uncertain
if IoT and non-IoT systems software are comparable, hindering the confident
application of results and best practices gained on non-IoT systems. Objective:
Therefore, we compare the code quality of two equivalent sets of IoT and non-IoT
systems to determine whether there are similarities and differences. We also
collect and revisit software-engineering best practices in non-IoT contexts to
apply them to IoT. Method: We design and apply a systematic method to select two
sets of 94 non-IoT and IoT systems software from GitHub with comparable
characteristics. We compute quality metrics on the systems in these two sets and
then analyse and compare the metric values. We analyse in depth and provide
specific examples of IoT system's complexity and how it manifests in the
codebases. After the comparison, We systematically select and present a list of
best practices to address the observed difference between IoT and non-IoT code.
Results: Through a comparison of metrics, we conclude that software for IoT
systems is more complex, coupled, larger, less maintainable, and cohesive than
non-IoT systems. Several factors, such as integrating multiple hardware and
software components and managing data communication between them, contribute to
these differences. Considering these differences, we present a revisited best
practices list with approaches, tools, or techniques for developing IoT systems.
As example, applying modularity, and refactoring are best practices for lowering
the complexity. Conclusion: Based on our work, researchers can now make an
informed decision using existing studies on the quality of non-IoT systems for
IoT systems.
