Title: Causal Reasoning in Software Quality Assurance: A Systematic Review
Authors: Luca Giamattei, Antonio Guerriero, Roberto Pietrantuono, Stefano Russo
ID: 2408.17183
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.17183

Abstract:
Context: Software Quality Assurance (SQA) is a fundamental part of software
engineering to ensure stakeholders that software products work as expected after
release in operation. Machine Learning (ML) has proven to be able to boost SQA
activities and contribute to the development of quality software systems. In
this context, Causal Reasoning is gaining increasing interest as a methodology
to go beyond a purely data-driven approach by exploiting the use of causality
for more effective SQA strategies. Objective: Provide a broad and detailed
overview of the use of causal reasoning for SQA activities, in order to support
researchers to access this research field, identifying room for application,
main challenges and research opportunities. Methods: A systematic review of the
scientific literature on causal reasoning for SQA. The study has found,
classified, and analyzed 86 articles, according to established guidelines for
software engineering secondary studies. Results: Results highlight the primary
areas within SQA where causal reasoning has been applied, the predominant
methodologies used, and the level of maturity of the proposed solutions. Fault
localization is the activity where causal reasoning is more exploited,
especially in the web services/microservices domain, but other tasks like
testing are rapidly gaining popularity. Both causal inference and causal
discovery are exploited, with the Pearl's graphical formulation of causality
being preferred, likely due to its intuitiveness. Tools to favour their
application are appearing at a fast pace - most of them after 2021. Conclusions:
The findings show that causal reasoning is a valuable means for SQA tasks with
respect to multiple quality attributes, especially during V&V, evolution and
maintenance to ensure reliability, while it is not yet fully exploited for
phases like ...
