Title: Data Quality Antipatterns for Software Analytics
Authors: Aaditya Bhatia, Dayi Lin, Gopi Krishnan Rajbahadur, Bram Adams, Ahmed E. Hassan
ID: 2408.12560
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.12560

Abstract:
Background: Data quality is vital in software analytics, particularly for
machine learning (ML) applications like software defect prediction (SDP).
Despite the widespread use of ML in software engineering, the effect of data
quality antipatterns on these models remains underexplored. Objective: This
study develops a taxonomy of ML-specific data quality antipatterns and assesses
their impact on software analytics models' performance and interpretation.
Methods: We identified eight types and 14 sub-types of ML-specific data quality
antipatterns through a literature review. We conducted experiments to determine
the prevalence of these antipatterns in SDP data (RQ1), assess how cleaning
order affects model performance (RQ2), evaluate the impact of antipattern
removal on performance (RQ3), and examine the consistency of interpretation from
models built with different antipatterns (RQ4). Results: In our SDP case study,
we identified nine antipatterns. Over 90% of these overlapped at both row and
column levels, complicating cleaning prioritization and risking excessive data
removal. The order of cleaning significantly impacts ML model performance, with
neural networks being more resilient to cleaning order changes than simpler
models like logistic regression. Antipatterns such as Tailed Distributions and
Class Overlap show a statistically significant correlation with performance
metrics when other antipatterns are cleaned. Models built with different
antipatterns showed moderate consistency in interpretation results. Conclusion:
The cleaning order of different antipatterns impacts ML model performance. Five
antipatterns have a statistically significant correlation with model performance
when others are cleaned. Additionally, model interpretation is moderately
affected by different data quality antipatterns.
