Title: Leveraging Reviewer Experience in Code Review Comment Generation
Authors: Hong Yi Lin, Patanamon Thongtanunam, Christoph Treude, Michael W. Godfrey, Chunhua Liu et al.
ID: 2409.10959
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.10959

Abstract:
Modern code review is a ubiquitous software quality assurance process aimed at
identifying potential issues within newly written code. Despite its
effectiveness, the process demands large amounts of effort from the human
reviewers involved. To help alleviate this workload, researchers have trained
deep learning models to imitate human reviewers in providing natural language
code reviews. Formally, this task is known as code review comment generation.
Prior work has demonstrated improvements in this task by leveraging machine
learning techniques and neural models, such as transfer learning and the
transformer architecture. However, the quality of the model generated reviews
remain sub-optimal due to the quality of the open-source code review data used
in model training. This is in part due to the data obtained from open-source
projects where code reviews are conducted in a public forum, and reviewers
possess varying levels of software development experience, potentially affecting
the quality of their feedback. To accommodate for this variation, we propose a
suite of experience-aware training methods that utilise the reviewers' past
authoring and reviewing experiences as signals for review quality. Specifically,
we propose experience-aware loss functions (ELF), which use the reviewers'
authoring and reviewing ownership of a project as weights in the model's loss
function. Through this method, experienced reviewers' code reviews yield larger
influence over the model's behaviour. Compared to the SOTA model, ELF was able
to generate higher quality reviews in terms of accuracy, informativeness, and
comment types generated. The key contribution of this work is the demonstration
of how traditional software engineering concepts such as reviewer experience can
be integrated into the design of AI-based automated code review models.
