Title: Metamorphic Debugging for Accountable Software
Authors: Saeid Tizpaz-Niari, Shiva Darian, Ashutosh Trivedi
ID: 2409.16140
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.16140

Abstract:
As the laws have become more complicated and enormous, the role of software
systems in navigating and understanding these intricacies has become more
critical. Given their socio-economic and legally critical implications, ensuring
software accountability -- encompassing qualities such as legal compliance,
explainability, perceptions of procedural justice, fairness of outcomes, and
confidentiality/privacy -- is of paramount social importance. Moreover, software
that accurately interprets its requirements, complies with legal standards and
upholds social fairness can serve as a surrogate for legal and social norms,
enabling policymakers to inquire about the law as seamlessly as a software
engineer conducts a test. However, ensuring software accountability faces three
key challenges: i) Translating legalese into formal specifications, ii) Lack of
a definitive 'truth' for queries (the oracle problem), and iii) Scarcity of
trustworthy datasets due to privacy and legal concerns. Drawing from the
experiences in debugging U.S. tax preparation software, we propose that these
challenges can be tackled by focusing on relational specifications. While the
exact output for a given input may be unknown, the relationship between the
outputs of two related inputs may be easier to express. This observation
resembles i) the legal doctrine of precedent, meaning that similar cases must
yield similar rulings; and ii) metamorphic relation (MR) in software engineering
that requires a specific relation between software inputs and outputs. We
propose metamorphic debugging as the foundation for detecting, explaining, and
repairing socio-legal software for these relations. We showcase recent results
that leverage metamorphic debugging to detect and explain accountability bugs in
tax prep and poverty management software systems.
