Title: On the Need to Monitor Continuous Integration Practices -- An Empirical Study
Authors: Jadson Santos, Daniel Alencar da Costa, Shane McIntosh, Uirá Kulesza
ID: 2409.05101
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.05101

Abstract:
Continuous Integration (CI) encompasses a set of widely adopted practices that
enhance software development. However, there are indications that developers may
not adequately monitor CI practices. Hence, this paper explores developers'
perceptions regarding the monitoring CI practices. To achieve this, we first
perform a Document Analysis to assess developers' expressed need for practice
monitoring in pull requests comments generated by developers during the
development process. After that, we conduct a survey among developers from 121
open-source projects to understand perception of the significance of monitoring
seven CI practices in their projects. Finally, we triangulate the emergent
themes from our survey by performing a second Document Analysis to understand
the extent of monitoring features supported by existing CI services. Our key
findings indicate that: 1) the most frequently mentioned CI practice during the
development process is ``Test Coverage'' (> 80\%), while ``Build Health'' and
``Time to Fix a Broken Build'' present notable opportunities for monitoring CI
practices; 2) developers do not adequately monitor all CI practices and express
interest in monitoring additional practices; and 3) the most popular CI services
currently offer limited native support for monitoring CI practices, requiring
the use of third-party tools. Our results lead us to conclude that monitoring CI
practices is often overlooked by both CI services and developers. Using
third-party tools in conjunction with CI services is challenging, they monitor
some redundant practices and still falls short of fully supporting CI practices
monitoring. Therefore, CI services should implement CI practices monitoring,
which would facilitate and encourage developers to monitor them.
