Title: Secure Multiparty Generative AI
Authors: Manil Shrestha, Yashodha Ravichandran, Edward Kim
ID: 2409.19120
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.19120

Abstract:
As usage of generative AI tools skyrockets, the amount of sensitive information
being exposed to these models and centralized model providers is alarming. For
example, confidential source code from Samsung suffered a data leak as the text
prompt to ChatGPT encountered data leakage. An increasing number of companies
are restricting the use of LLMs (Apple, Verizon, JPMorgan Chase, etc.) due to
data leakage or confidentiality issues. Also, an increasing number of
centralized generative model providers are restricting, filtering, aligning, or
censoring what can be used. Midjourney and RunwayML, two of the major image
generation platforms, restrict the prompts to their system via prompt filtering.
Certain political figures are restricted from image generation, as well as words
associated with women's health care, rights, and abortion. In our research, we
present a secure and private methodology for generative artificial intelligence
that does not expose sensitive data or models to third-party AI providers. Our
work modifies the key building block of modern generative AI algorithms, e.g.
the transformer, and introduces confidential and verifiable multiparty
computations in a decentralized network to maintain the 1) privacy of the user
input and obfuscation to the output of the model, and 2) introduce privacy to
the model itself. Additionally, the sharding process reduces the computational
burden on any one node, enabling the distribution of resources of large
generative AI processes across multiple, smaller nodes. We show that as long as
there exists one honest node in the decentralized computation, security is
maintained. We also show that the inference process will still succeed if only a
majority of the nodes in the computation are successful. Thus, our method offers
both secure and verifiable computation in a decentralized network.
