Title: Does the Vulnerability Threaten Our Projects? Automated Vulnerable API Detection for Third-Party Libraries
Authors: Fangyuan Zhang, Lingling Fan, Sen Chen, Miaoying Cai, Sihan Xu et al.
ID: 2409.02753
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.02753

Abstract:
Developers usually use TPLs to facilitate the development of the projects to
avoid reinventing the wheels, however, the vulnerable TPLs indeed cause severe
security threats. The majority of existing research only considered whether
projects used vulnerable TPLs but neglected whether the vulnerable code of the
TPLs was indeed used by the projects, which inevitably results in false
positives and further requires additional patching efforts and maintenance
costs. To address this, we propose VAScanner, which can effectively identify
vulnerable root methods causing vulnerabilities in TPLs and further identify all
vulnerable APIs of TPLs used by Java projects. Specifically, we first collect
the initial patch methods from the patch commits and extract accurate patch
methods by employing a patch-unrelated sifting mechanism, then we further
identify the vulnerable root methods for each vulnerability by employing an
augmentation mechanism. Based on them, we leverage backward call graph analysis
to identify all vulnerable APIs for each vulnerable TPL version and construct a
database consisting of 90,749 (2,410,779 with library versions) vulnerable APIs
with 1.45% false positive proportion with a 95% CI of [1.31%, 1.59%] from 362
TPLs with 14,775 versions. Our experiments show VAScanner eliminates 5.78% false
positives and 2.16% false negatives owing to the proposed sifting and
augmentation mechanisms. Besides, it outperforms the state-of-the-art
method-level tool in analyzing direct dependencies, Eclipse Steady, achieving
more effective detection of vulnerable APIs. Furthermore, in a large-scale
analysis of 3,147 projects using vulnerable TPLs, we find only 21.51% of
projects (with 1.83% false positive proportion and a 95% CI of [0.71%, 4.61%])
were threatened through vulnerable APIs by vulnerable TPLs, demonstrating that
VAScanner can potentially reduce false positives significantly.
