Title: SpecEval: Evaluating Code Comprehension in Large Language Models via Program Specifications
Authors: Lezhi Ma, Shangqing Liu, Lei Bu, Shangru Li, Yida Wang et al.
ID: 2409.12866
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.12866

Abstract:
Large Language models have achieved impressive performance in automated software
engineering. Extensive efforts have been made to evaluate the abilities of code
LLMs in various aspects, with an increasing number of benchmarks and evaluation
frameworks proposed. Apart from the most sought-after capability of code
generation, the capability of code comprehension is being granted growing
attention. Nevertheless, existing works assessing the code comprehension
capability of LLMs exhibit varied limitations. Evaluation frameworks like
CRUXEval and REval usually focus on code reasoning tasks over a certain input
case, leading to a limited range of execution traces covered, resulting in a
loss in code semantics examined and the inability to assess the comprehensive
understanding of LLMs concerning the target program. To tackle these challenges,
we propose SpecEval, a novel black-box evaluation framework to evaluate code
comprehension in LLMs via program specifications. Inspired by the idea that
specifications can act as a comprehensive articulation of program behaviors
concerning all possible execution traces, we employ formalized program
specifications to represent program semantics and perform comprehensive
evaluations. In particular, four specification-related tasks are designed
meticulously to assess the capability of LLMs from basic to advanced levels.
Counterfactual analysis is further conducted to study the performance variance
of LLMs under semantics-preserving perturbations. Systematic experiments are
conducted on six state-of-the-art LLMs. Extensive experimental results present a
below-satisfactory performance of LLMs on specification-related tasks, revealing
the limitations of existing LLMs in terms of articulating program semantics with
formal specifications. Counterfactual analysis also reveals the sensitivity of
LLMs towards semantic-preserving perturbations.
