Title: modOpt: A modular development environment and library for optimization algorithms
Authors: Anugrah Jo Joshy, John T. Hwang
ID: 2410.12942
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.12942

Abstract:
Recent advances in computing hardware and modeling software have given rise to
new applications for numerical optimization. These new applications occasionally
uncover bottlenecks in existing optimization algorithms and necessitate further
specialization of the algorithms. However, such specialization requires expert
knowledge of the underlying mathematical theory and the software implementation
of existing algorithms. To address this challenge, we present modOpt, an
open-source software framework that facilitates the construction of optimization
algorithms from modules. The modular environment provided by modOpt enables
developers to tailor an existing algorithm for a new application by only
altering the relevant modules. modOpt is designed as a platform to support
students and beginner developers in quickly learning and developing their own
algorithms. With that aim, the entirety of the framework is written in Python,
and it is well-documented, well-tested, and hosted open-source on GitHub.
Several additional features are embedded into the framework to assist both
beginner and advanced developers. In addition to providing stock modules, the
framework also includes fully transparent implementations of pedagogical
optimization algorithms in Python. To facilitate testing and benchmarking of new
algorithms, the framework features built-in visualization and recording
capabilities, interfaces to modeling frameworks such as OpenMDAO and CSDL,
interfaces to general-purpose optimization algorithms such as SNOPT and SLSQP,
an interface to the CUTEst test problem set, etc. In this paper, we present the
underlying software architecture of modOpt, review its various features, discuss
several educational and performance-oriented algorithms within modOpt, and
present numerical studies illustrating its unique benefits.
