Title: Software Frugality in an Accelerating World: the Case of Continuous Integration
Authors: Quentin Perez, Romain Lefeuvre, Thomas Degueule, Olivier Barais, Benoit Combemale
ID: 2410.15816
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.15816

Abstract:
The acceleration of software development and delivery requires rigorous
continuous testing and deployment of software systems, which are being deployed
in increasingly diverse, complex, and dynamic environments. In recent years, the
popularization of DevOps and integrated software forges like GitLab and GitHub
has largely democratized Continuous Integration (CI) practices for a growing
number of software. However, this trend intersects significantly with global
energy consumption concerns and the growing demand for frugality in the
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) sector. CI pipelines typically
run in data centers which contribute significantly to the environmental
footprint of ICT, yet there is little information available regarding their
environmental impact. This article aims to bridge this gap by conducting the
first large-scale analysis of the energy footprint of CI pipelines implemented
with GitHub Actions and to provide a first overview of the energy impact of CI.
We collect, instrument, and reproduce 838 workflows from 396 Java repositories
hosted on GitHub to measure their energy consumption. We observe that the
average unitary energy cost of a pipeline is relatively low, at 10 Wh. However,
due to repeated invocations of these pipelines in real settings, the aggregated
energy consumption cost per project is high, averaging 22 kWh. When evaluating
CO2 emissions based on regional Wh-to-CO2 estimates, we observe that the average
aggregated CO2 emissions are significant, averaging 10.5 kg. To put this into
perspective, this is akin to the emissions produced by driving approximately 100
kilometers in a typical European car (110 gCO2/km). In light of our results, we
advocate that developers should have the means to better anticipate and reflect
on the environmental consequences of their CI choices when implementing DevOps
practices.
