Title: Yama: Precise Opcode-based Data Flow Analysis for Detecting PHP Applications Vulnerabilities
Authors: Zhao Jiazhen, Zhu Kailong, Yu Lu, Huang Hui, Lu Yuliang
ID: 2410.12351
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.12351

Abstract:
Web applications encompass various aspects of daily life, including online
shopping, e-learning, and internet banking. Once there is a vulnerability, it
can cause severe societal and economic damage. Due to its ease of use, PHP has
become the preferred server-side programming language for web applications,
making PHP applications a primary target for attackers. Data flow analysis is
widely used for vulnerability detection before deploying web applications
because of its efficiency. However, the high complexity of the PHP language
makes it difficult to achieve precise data flow analysis. In this paper, we
present Yama, a context-sensitive and path-sensitive interprocedural data flow
analysis method for PHP, designed to detect taint-style vulnerabilities in PHP
applications. We have found that the precise semantics and clear control flow of
PHP opcodes enable data flow analysis to be more precise and efficient.
Leveraging this observation, we established parsing rules for PHP opcodes and
implemented a precise understanding of PHP program semantics in Yama. We
evaluated Yama from three dimensions: basic data flow analysis capabilities,
complex semantic analysis capabilities, and the ability to discover
vulnerabilities in real-world applications, demonstrating Yama's advancement in
vulnerability detection. Specifically, Yama possesses context-sensitive and
path-sensitive interprocedural analysis capabilities, achieving a 99.1% true
positive rate in complex semantic analysis experiments related to type
inference, dynamic features, and built-in functions. It discovered and reported
38 zero-day vulnerabilities across 24 projects on GitHub with over 1,000 stars
each, assigning 34 new CVE IDs. We have released the source code of the
prototype implementation and the parsing rules for PHP opcodes to facilitate
future research.
