Title: TraDE: Network and Traffic-aware Adaptive Scheduling for Microservices Under Dynamics
Authors: Ming Chen, Muhammed Tawfiqul Islam, Maria Rodriguez Read, Rajkumar Buyya
ID: 2411.05323
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.05323

Abstract:
The transition from monolithic architecture to microservices has enhanced
flexibility in application design and its scalable execution. This approach
typically uses a computing cluster managed by a container orchestration platform
to deploy microservices. However, this shift introduces significant challenges,
particularly in the efficient scheduling of containerized services. These
challenges are compounded by unpredictable scenarios such as dynamic incoming
workloads with various execution traffic and variable communication delays among
cluster nodes. Existing works often overlook the real-time traffic impacts of
dynamic requests on running microservices, as well as the varied communication
delays across cluster nodes. Consequently, even optimally deployed microservices
could suffer from significant performance degradation over time. To address
these issues, we propose a network and traffic-aware adaptive scheduling
framework, TraDE, which can adaptively redeploy microservice instances to
maintain desired performance amid changing traffic and network conditions within
the hosting cluster. We have implemented TraDE as an extension to the Kubernetes
platform. Additionally, we deployed realistic microservice applications in a
real compute cluster and conducted extensive experiments to assess our
framework's performance in various scenarios. The results demonstrate the
effectiveness of TraDE in rescheduling running microservices to enhance
end-to-end performance while maintaining a high goodput ratio. Compared with the
existing method NetMARKS, TraDE outperforms it by reducing the average response
time of the application by up to 48.3%, and improving the throughput by up to
1.2-1.5x across workloads while maintaining a goodput ratio of 95.36%, and
showing robust adaptive capability to meet QoS targets under sustained workloads
and dynamic networking conditions.
