Title: Systematic Mapping Study on Requirements Engineering for Regulatory Compliance of Software Systems
Authors: Oleksandr Kosenkov, Parisa Elahidoost, Tony Gorschek, Jannik Fischbach, Daniel Mendez et al.
ID: 2411.01940
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.01940

Abstract:
Context: As the diversity and complexity of regulations affecting
Software-Intensive Products and Services (SIPS) is increasing, software
engineers need to address the growing regulatory scrutiny. As with any other
non-negotiable requirements, SIPS compliance should be addressed early in SIPS
engineering - i.e., during requirements engineering (RE). Objectives: In the
conditions of the expanding regulatory landscape, existing research offers
scattered insights into regulatory compliance of SIPS. This study addresses the
pressing need for a structured overview of the state of the art in software RE
and its contribution to regulatory compliance of SIPS. Method: We conducted a
systematic mapping study to provide an overview of the current state of research
regarding challenges, principles and practices for regulatory compliance of SIPS
related to RE. We focused on the role of RE and its contribution to other SIPS
lifecycle phases. We retrieved 6914 studies published from 2017 until 2023 from
four academic databases, which we filtered down to 280 relevant primary studies.
Results: We identified and categorized the RE-related challenges in regulatory
compliance of SIPS and their potential connection to six types of principles and
practices. We found that about 13.6% of the primary studies considered the
involvement of both software engineers and legal experts. About 20.7% of primary
studies considered RE in connection to other process areas. Most primary studies
focused on a few popular regulation fields and application domains. Our results
suggest that there can be differences in terms of challenges and involvement of
stakeholders across different fields of regulation. Conclusion: Our findings
highlight the need for an in-depth investigation of stakeholders' roles,
relationships between process areas, and specific challenges for distinct
regulatory fields to guide research and practice.
