Title: Tracing Optimization for Performance Modeling and Regression Detection
Authors: Kaveh Shahedi, Heng Li, Maxime Lamothe, Foutse Khomh
ID: 2411.17548
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.17548

Abstract:
Software performance modeling plays a crucial role in developing and maintaining
software systems. A performance model analytically describes the relationship
between the performance of a system and its runtime activities. This process
typically examines various aspects of a system's runtime behavior, such as the
execution frequency of functions or methods, to forecast performance metrics
like program execution time. By using performance models, developers can predict
expected performance and thereby effectively identify and address unexpected
performance regressions when actual performance deviates from the model's
predictions. One common and precise method for capturing performance behavior is
software tracing, which involves instrumenting the execution of a program,
either at the kernel level (e.g., system calls) or application level (e.g.,
function calls). However, due to the nature of tracing, it can be highly
resource-intensive, making it impractical for production environments where
resources are limited. In this work, we propose statistical approaches to reduce
tracing overhead by identifying and excluding performance-insensitive code
regions, particularly application-level functions, from tracing while still
building accurate performance models that can capture performance degradations.
By selecting an optimal set of functions to be traced, we can construct
optimized performance models that achieve an R-2 score of up to 99% and,
sometimes, outperform full tracing models (models using non-optimized tracing
data), while significantly reducing the tracing overhead by more than 80% in
most cases. Our optimized performance models can also capture performance
regressions in our studied programs effectively, demonstrating their usefulness
in real-world scenarios. Our approach is fully automated, making it ready to be
used in production environments with minimal human effort.
