Title: Security Implications of User Non-compliance Behavior to Software Updates: A Risk Assessment Study
Authors: Mahzabin Tamanna, Mohd Anwar, Joseph D. W. Stephens
ID: 2411.06262
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.06262

Abstract:
Software updates are essential to enhance security, fix bugs, and add better
features to the existing software. While some users accept software updates,
non-compliance remains a widespread issue. While some users accept software
updates, non-compliance remains a widespread issue. End users' systems remain
vulnerable to security threats when security updates are not installed or are
installed with a delay. Despite research efforts, users' noncompliance behavior
with software updates is still prevalent. In this study, we explored how
psychological factors influence users' perception and behavior toward software
updates. In addition, we investigated how information about potential
vulnerabilities and risk scores influences their behavior. Next, we proposed a
model that utilizes attributes from the National Vulnerability Database (NVD) to
effectively assess the overall risk score associated with delaying software
updates. Next, we conducted a user study with Windows OS users, showing that
providing a risk score for not updating their systems and information about
vulnerabilities significantly increased users' willingness to update their
systems. Additionally, we examined the influence of demographic factors, gender,
on users' decision-making regarding software updates. Our results show no
statistically significant difference in male and female users' responses in
terms of concerns about securing their systems. The implications of this study
are relevant for software developers and manufacturers as they can use this
information to design more effective software update notification messages. The
communication of the potential risks and their corresponding risk scores may
motivate users to take action and update their systems in a timely manner, which
can ultimately improve the overall security of the system.
