Title: Requirements Engineering for Older Adult Digital Health Software: A Systematic Literature Review
Authors: Yuqing Xiao, John Grundy, Anuradha Madugalla
ID: 2411.03656
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.03656

Abstract:
Growth of the older adult population has led to an increasing interest in
technology-supported aged care. However, the area has some challenges such as a
lack of caregivers and limitations in understanding the emotional, social,
physical, and mental well-being needs of seniors. Furthermore, there is a gap in
the understanding between developers and ageing people of their requirements.
Digital health can be important in supporting older adults wellbeing, emotional
requirements, and social needs. Requirements Engineering (RE) is a major
software engineering field, which can help to identify, elicit and prioritize
the requirements of stakeholders and ensure that the systems meet standards for
performance, reliability, and usability. We carried out a systematic review of
the literature on RE for older adult digital health software. This was necessary
to show the representatives of the current stage of understanding the needs of
older adults in aged care digital health. Using established guidelines outlined
by the Kitchenham method, the PRISMA and the PICO guideline, we developed a
protocol, followed by the systematic exploration of eight databases. This
resulted in 69 primary studies of high relevance, which were subsequently
subjected to data extraction, synthesis, and reporting. We highlight key RE
processes in digital health software for ageing people. It explored the
utilization of technology for older user well-being and care, and the
evaluations of such solutions. The review also identified key limitations found
in existing primary studies that inspire future research opportunities. The
results indicate that requirement gathering and understanding have a significant
variation between different studies. The differences are in the quality, depth,
and techniques adopted for requirement gathering and these differences are
largely due to uneven adoption of RE methods.
