Title: CI/CD Configuration Practices in Open-Source Android Apps: An Empirical Study
Authors: Taher A. Ghaleb, Osamah Abduljalil, Safwat Hassan
ID: 2411.06077
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.06077

Abstract:
Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery (CI/CD) is a well-established
practice that automatically builds, tests, packages, and deploys software
systems. To adopt CI/CD, software developers need to configure their projects
using dedicated YML configuration files. Mobile apps have distinct
characteristics with respect to CI/CD practices, such as testing on various
emulators and deploying to app stores. However, little is known about the
challenges and added value of adopting CI/CD in mobile apps and how developers
maintain such a practice. In this paper, we conduct an empirical study on CI/CD
practices in 2,557 Android apps adopting four popular CI/CD services, namely
GitHub Actions, Travis CI, CircleCI, and GitLab CI/CD. We also compare our
findings with those reported in prior research on general CI/CD practices to
situate them within broader trends. We observe a lack of commonality and
standardization across CI/CD services and Android apps, leading to complex YML
configurations and associated maintenance efforts. We also observe that CI/CD
configurations focus primarily on the build setup, with around half of the
projects performing standard testing and only 9% incorporating deployment. In
addition, we find that CI/CD configurations are changed bi-monthly on average,
with frequent maintenance correlating with active issue tracking, project
size/age, and community engagement. Our qualitative analysis of commits
uncovered 11 themes in CI/CD maintenance activities, with over a third of the
changes focusing on improving workflows and fixing build issues, whereas another
third involves updating the build environment, tools, and dependencies. Our
study emphasizes the necessity for automation and AI-powered tools to improve
CI/CD processes for mobile apps and advocates creating adaptable open-source
tools to efficiently manage resources, especially in testing and deployment.
