Title: An Empirical Study of Vulnerability Detection using Federated Learning
Authors: Peiheng Zhou, Ming Hu, Xingrun Quan, Yawen Peng, Xiaofei Xie et al.
ID: 2411.16099
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.16099

Abstract:
Although Deep Learning (DL) methods becoming increasingly popular in
vulnerability detection, their performance is seriously limited by insufficient
training data. This is mainly because few existing software organizations can
maintain a complete set of high-quality samples for DL-based vulnerability
detection. Due to the concerns about privacy leakage, most of them are reluctant
to share data, resulting in the data silo problem. Since enables collaboratively
model training without data sharing, Federated Learning (FL) has been
investigated as a promising means of addressing the data silo problem in
DL-based vulnerability detection. However, since existing FL-based vulnerability
detection methods focus on specific applications, it is still far unclear i) how
well FL adapts to common vulnerability detection tasks and ii) how to design a
high-performance FL solution for a specific vulnerability detection task. To
answer these two questions, this paper first proposes VulFL, an effective
evaluation framework for FL-based vulnerability detection. Then, based on VulFL,
this paper conducts a comprehensive study to reveal the underlying capabilities
of FL in dealing with different types of CWEs, especially when facing various
data heterogeneity scenarios. Our experimental results show that, compared to
independent training, FL can significantly improve the detection performance of
common AI models on all investigated CWEs, though the performance of FL-based
vulnerability detection is limited by heterogeneous data. To highlight the
performance differences between different FL solutions for vulnerability
detection, we extensively investigate the impacts of different configuration
strategies for each framework component of VulFL. Our study sheds light on the
potential of FL in vulnerability detection, which can be used to guide the
design of FL-based solutions for vulnerability detection.
