Title: MVD: A Multi-Lingual Software Vulnerability Detection Framework
Authors: Boyu Zhang, Triet H. M. Le, M. Ali Babar
ID: 2412.06166
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.06166

Abstract:
Software vulnerabilities can result in catastrophic cyberattacks that
increasingly threaten business operations. Consequently, ensuring the safety of
software systems has become a paramount concern for both private and public
sectors. Recent literature has witnessed increasing exploration of
learning-based approaches for software vulnerability detection. However, a key
limitation of these techniques is their primary focus on a single programming
language, such as C/C++, which poses constraints considering the polyglot nature
of modern software projects. Further, there appears to be an oversight in
harnessing the synergies of vulnerability knowledge across varied languages,
potentially underutilizing the full capabilities of these methods. To address
the aforementioned issues, we introduce MVD - an innovative multi-lingual
vulnerability detection framework. This framework acquires the ability to detect
vulnerabilities across multiple languages by concurrently learning from
vulnerability data of various languages, which are curated by our specialized
pipeline. We also incorporate incremental learning to enable the detection
capability of MVD to be extended to new languages, thus augmenting its practical
utility. Extensive experiments on our curated dataset of more than 11K
real-world multi-lingual vulnerabilities substantiate that our framework
significantly surpasses state-of-the-art methods in multi-lingual vulnerability
detection by 83.7% to 193.6% in PR-AUC. The results also demonstrate that MVD
detects vulnerabilities well for new languages without compromising the
detection performance of previously trained languages, even when training data
for the older languages is unavailable. Overall, our findings motivate and pave
the way for the prediction of multi-lingual vulnerabilities in modern software
systems.
