Title: Evaluating the Arts in Education
Authors: Sowinski, Scott A
ID: openalex.W4230819442
URL: https://doi.org/10.2307/3344858

Teacher evaluation has a longstanding importance in public school education
(Howell, 2015). Teacher evaluation in Illinois predominantly relies on the use
of the Danielson Framework for Professional Practice which is used to rate
teacher effectiveness (Danielson, 2011). The Danielson Framework is embedded in
an evaluation cycle that provides pre-conferencing, observation, and a post-
observation process intent on providing feedback for continued growth in
professional practice (Steinberg &amp; Donaldson, 2016). The Danielson Framework
is not content specific; its domains are meant to apply to all grade levels and
subjects areas (Danielson, 2011). \nThe purpose of this study was to investigate
how evaluators and arts teachers experience the current teacher evaluation
process in Illinois in terms of assessing teacher practice and supporting
professional growth. Five arts? teachers and two supervising evaluators were
interviewed regarding their experiences in relation to the Danielson Framework
and their perceptions on its use and effectiveness in professional growth. The
data indicate respondents found the Danielson Framework useful in determining a
unform practice of instruction but ineffective in meeting the specificity of
connectedness, interpersonal, and interpretive elements found in arts education.
The data also indicate respondents found evaluative experience to be most
effective when supervised by those who understand their content. Lastly,
respondents indicated that the formal teacher evaluation process led to an
inaccurate depiction of daily practice. Respondents indicated that the
evaluation process focuses on meeting pre-designated benchmarks rather than
serving students. The study concludes with recommendations for continued
research in evaluating the interpersonal and emotional contexts that these
teachers found most important, but least examined in evaluating educational
practice. Recommendations are made to institution and organizations that employ
evaluation tools for teachers of the arts to engage in discussions with arts
professionals to better respond to intangible elements of interconnectedness and
relationship building not explicit in the Danielson Framework. Suggestion is
also made for continued training for evaluators on differentiating feedback to
the specialization of arts content. The usage of art extends beyond content and
centralizes in a different meaningfulness to student learning than core content
that is tested and assessed. Lastly, arts educators and evaluators offer the
opinion extended here that greater attention be paid to scaffolded feedback and
ratings throughout the instructional tenure. As teachers are expected to grow,
so should the quality and deepening of the feedback provided.
