Title: STEP-LLM: Generating CAD STEP Models from Natural Language with Large Language Models
Authors: Xiangyu Shi, Junyang Ding, Xu Zhao, Sinong Zhan, Payal Mohapatra et al.
ID: 2601.12641
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.12641

Abstract:
Computer-aided design (CAD) is vital to modern manufacturing, yet model creation
remains labor-intensive and expertise-heavy. To enable non-experts to translate
intuitive design intent into manufacturable artifacts, recent large language
models-based text-to-CAD efforts focus on command sequences or script-based
formats like CadQuery. However, these formats are kernel-dependent and lack
universality for manufacturing. In contrast, the Standard for the Exchange of
Product Data (STEP, ISO 10303) file is a widely adopted, neutral boundary
representation (B-rep) format directly compatible with manufacturing, but its
graph-structured, cross-referenced nature poses unique challenges for
auto-regressive LLMs. To address this, we curate a dataset of ~40K STEP-caption
pairs and introduce novel preprocessing tailored for the graph-structured format
of STEP, including a depth-first search-based reserialization that linearizes
cross-references while preserving locality and chain-of-thought(CoT)-style
structural annotations that guide global coherence. We integrate
retrieval-augmented generation to ground predictions in relevant examples for
supervised fine-tuning, and refine generation quality through reinforcement
learning with a specific Chamfer Distance-based geometric reward. Experiments
demonstrate consistent gains of our STEP-LLM in geometric fidelity over the
Text2CAD baseline, with improvements arising from multiple stages of our
framework: the RAG module substantially enhances completeness and renderability,
the DFS-based reserialization strengthens overall accuracy, and the RL further
reduces geometric discrepancy. Both metrics and visual comparisons confirm that
STEP-LLM generates shapes with higher fidelity than Text2CAD. These results show
the feasibility of LLM-driven STEP model generation from natural language,
showing its potential to democratize CAD design for manufacturing.
