Title: If You Want Coherence, Orchestrate a Team of Rivals: Multi-Agent Models of Organizational Intelligence
Authors: Gopal Vijayaraghavan, Prasanth Jayachandran, Arun Murthy, Sunil Govindan, Vivek Subramanian
ID: 2601.14351
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.14351

Abstract:
AI Agents can perform complex operations at great speed, but just like all the
humans we have ever hired, their intelligence remains fallible.
Miscommunications aren't noticed, systemic biases have no counter-action, and
inner monologues are rarely written down. We did not come to fire them for their
mistakes, but to hire them and provide a safe productive working environment. We
posit that we can reuse a common corporate organizational structure: teams of
independent AI agents with strict role boundaries can work with common goals,
but opposing incentives. Multiple models serving as a team of rivals can catch
and minimize errors within the final product at a small cost to the velocity of
actions. In this paper we demonstrate that we can achieve reliability without
acquiring perfect components, but through careful orchestration of imperfect
ones. This paper describes the architecture of such a system in practice:
specialized agent teams (planners, executors, critics, experts), organized into
an organization with clear goals, coordinated through a remote code executor
that keeps data transformations and tool invocations separate from reasoning
models. Rather than agents directly calling tools and ingesting full responses,
they write code that executes remotely; only relevant summaries return to agent
context. By preventing raw data and tool outputs from contaminating context
windows, the system maintains clean separation between perception (brains that
plan and reason) and execution (hands that perform heavy data transformations
and API calls). We demonstrate the approach achieves over 90% internal error
interception prior to user exposure while maintaining acceptable latency
tradeoffs. A survey from our traces shows that we only trade off cost and
latency to achieve correctness and incrementally expand capabilities without
impacting existing ones.
