Title: Artisan: Agentic Artifact Evaluation
Authors: Doehyun Baek, Michael Pradel
ID: 2602.10046
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.10046

Artifact evaluation has become standard practice in the software engineering
community to ensure the reproducibility of research results. However, the
current manual process is labor-intensive, and hence, done only as a one-time
assessment for a subset of all papers. To support the artifact evaluation
effort, we present Artisan, an automated LLM agent for reproducing research
results given a paper and its artifact. The approach is enabled by two key
contributions: First, we frame the reproduction problem as a code generation
task where the goal is to generate a reproduction script that, when executed,
reproduces the results reported in a paper. Unlike prior work on automatically
reproducing research results in other domains, this formulation allows for
running the script independently of the agent and for assessing the reproduction
process at a fine-grained level. Second, we design automated judging mechanism
that guides the agent toward the expected results without revealing them and
that prevent trivial solutions, such as simply copying checked-in results. To
evaluate Artisan, we introduce Artisan-Bench, the first benchmark assessing the
ability to generate reproduction scripts and the first benchmark for automated
artifact evaluation in software engineering. Artisan-Bench comprises 60 tasks
derived from 23 software engineering papers, covering different research areas
and programming languages. We validate all tasks in Artisan-Bench for
reproducibility to ensure that the tasks are feasible. Our experiments show that
Artisan is effective, producing 44/60 reproduction scripts and outperforming the
best available baseline, a vanilla LLM agent (mini-swe-agent), by 3.14$\times$
in terms of reproduction scripts generated while taking $0.45 and 48 minutes, on
average per task. Artisan also helped uncover 20 new errors in either the paper
or artifact.
