Title: Ego2Web: A Web Agent Benchmark Grounded in Egocentric Videos
Authors: Shoubin Yu, Lei Shu, Antoine Yang, Yao Fu, Srinivas Sunkara et al. (+4)
ID: 2603.22529
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.22529

Multimodal AI agents are increasingly automating complex real-world workflows
that involve online web execution. However, current web-agent benchmarks suffer
from a critical limitation: they focus entirely on web-based interaction and
perception, lacking grounding in the user's real-world physical surroundings.
This limitation prevents evaluation in crucial scenarios, such as when an agent
must use egocentric visual perception (e.g., via AR glasses) to recognize an
object in the user's surroundings and then complete a related task online. To
address this gap, we introduce Ego2Web, the first benchmark designed to bridge
egocentric video perception and web agent execution. Ego2Web pairs real-world
first-person video recordings with web tasks that require visual understanding,
web task planning, and interaction in an online environment for successful
completion. We utilize an automatic data-generation pipeline combined with human
verification and refinement to curate well-constructed, high-quality video-task
pairs across diverse web task types, including e-commerce, media retrieval,
knowledge lookup, etc. To facilitate accurate and scalable evaluation for our
benchmark, we also develop a novel LLM-as-a-Judge automatic evaluation method,
Ego2WebJudge, which achieves approximately 84% agreement with human judgment,
substantially higher than existing evaluation methods. Experiments with diverse
SoTA agents on our Ego2Web show that their performance is weak, with substantial
headroom across all task categories. We also conduct a comprehensive ablation
study on task design, highlighting the necessity of accurate video understanding
in the proposed task and the limitations of current agents. We hope Ego2Web can
be a critical new resource for developing truly capable AI assistants that can
seamlessly see, understand, and act across the physical and digital worlds.
