Title: Managing Fuzziness: Leveraging LLMs for Discovering  Credibility Indicators in Asylum Cases
Authors: None
ID: socarxiv.r29fv_v1
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/socarxiv.r29fv_v1

In many areas of law, legal concepts are characterised by a having degree of
fuzziness,  which leads to “matters of degree” assessment when such concepts are
applied in legal practice. In  this paper, we examine how this fuzziness may be
mapped and understood. We approach this problem  through an abductive inspired
discovery approach. Specifically, we show how LLMs can be  employed to
understand how decision-makers make inferences about applicants’ credibility in
asylum  cases and to capture indicators attached to such evidence assessments -
an issue surrounded by  significant disagreement in both legal scholarship and
legal practice. We do this through a two-step  methodology that recognizes the
uncertainties surrounding LLMs and attempts to purposefully utilize  the breadth
of learned representations embedded in the model. Step one uses open-ended
prompting  to identify credibility indicators on a sample from our dataset; step
two synthesizes these discoveries  into generalizable categories and applies
them to the full dataset. Our analysis demonstrates that  LLMs can successfully
identify credibility factors that correspond to established legal understanding
of credibility’s role as evidence while revealing how these abstract principles
translate to more a  variety of credibility indicators in applied practice. Our
scaled analysis across the full dataset reveals  the relative frequency and
importance of different credibility indicators in Danish asylum practice.  This
methodology advances both legal scholarship and computational social science by
offering an  approach to analyzing multi-variable and open-ended legal concepts
at a greater scale. Our abductive  inspired framework provides a systematic
approach for empirically grounding theoretical  understandings of fuzzy legal
concepts, bridging the gap between abstract evidence law and actual  decision-
making practice in a way that is broadly applicable in law as well as other
social science  domains.
