Title: Implementing National Institute for Health and Care (NICE) Guidelines in Long-term Care in England and Wales: “Is it worth it?”- A theory-informed economic evaluation
Authors: None
ID: socarxiv.5dsvr_v1
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/socarxiv.5dsvr_v1

Background: Providing affordable, good-quality long-term care is a pertinent
challenge. Little is known about how councils implement good practice
guidelines, resources required and the benefits of implementation.  Objective:
To assess the processes, cost and consequences of implementing guidelines by the
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence in three councils in England
and Wales.  Methods: Using a theory-informed approach to economic evaluation,
data were gathered from managers in councils and providers using workshops,
conversations and questionnaires. Implementation activities were gathered
systematically and costed using a tailored framework. Consequences were
established by asking providers to estimate service use impacts from guideline
adherence and assigning costs. A participatory approach was used with
participants.  Results: Costs of implementation linked to staff time inputs were
£96,400 (council 1), £113,300 (council 2), and £130,000 (council 3). Cost
referred to setting up organisational structures, conducting a wide range of
activities with providers (e.g., training, audits) and dissemination. Cost
drivers were linked to processes such as gaining senior managers’ buy-in and
involving front-line staff. Quantifiable gains related to guideline adherence
reflected a shift to prevention-focused services, promoted in many of the NICE
guidelines. Wider benefits included those of staff wellbeing. Although service
providers were satisfied with the implementation activities, the contribution to
guideline adherence was difficult to establish.  Conclusion: Resource
implications linked to adherence with recommended practice might need to be
carefully considered when developing and disseminating guidelines. Theory-
informed, participatory approaches to evaluation are supporting relevance and
feasibility.
