Title: Norm heterogeneity and the emergence of cooperation A spatial agent-based model of conditional cooperation
Authors: None
ID: socarxiv.4tfvj_v1
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/socarxiv.4tfvj_v1

The resolution of collective-action problems often depends on social norms and
pressure to conform to group behaviour, yet individuals typically differ in how
strongly they perceive and internalise these norms. While existing models of
norm change and social tipping often assume homogeneous and static normative
expectations, recent evidence suggests substantial heterogeneity in the
perceived norm strength. We study how different compositions of such
heterogeneity within a community shape the emergence and internalisation of
cooperative behaviour. We develop a spatial agent-based model in which agents
follow a conditional-cooperation norm but differ in norm strength, characterised
as either tight or loose. Agents interact locally and update their cooperation
thresholds endogenously through a combination of payoff-driven learning and
social learning from experiencing group behaviour. Our results show that
introducing a moderate share of loose-norm individuals into otherwise tight-
dominated communities can facilitate the emergence of cooperative tipping points
by enabling cooperation to seed and spread locally, even when agents place zero
weight on social-relative-to-financial learning. However, whether cooperation
becomes internalised and persists depends critically on the relative weight
given to social and financial learning. A higher weight on social learning
amplifies local behavioural feedbacks, sharpens tipping-point dynamics, and
allows agents with tight social norms to internalise cooperation such that it
can be sustained with fewer cooperating group members. Once cooperation spreads,
conformity pressure stabilises cooperative behaviour among loose-social-norm
agents. Taken together, our findings highlight the importance of community
composition and norm-strength heterogeneity for collective-action dynamics, and
show how heterogeneity in perceived norm strength can generate abrupt and
persistent transitions in cooperative behaviour.
