Title: Bonus without burden: Alleged methodological obstacles to Monitoring and Evaluation of Foreign Policy in light of a practical counterproposal
Authors: None
ID: socarxiv.es7nw_v1
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/socarxiv.es7nw_v1

Foreign Policy Analysis (FPA) literature has, in recent decades, incorporated
the so-called "domestic turn" in International Relations, moving closer to
Political Science and Policy Sciences by recognizing foreign policy as a public
policy. More specifically, this approach would imply incorporating the stages of
monitoring and evaluation (M&amp;E) into the study of foreign policy, aligning
it with the public policy cycle and evidence-informed public policy practices.
However, although the debate on the democratic and institutional importance of
M&amp;E/FP has advanced, empirical exercises in evaluating concrete foreign
policies remain scarce. Arguments persist about supposed specificities of
foreign policy that would justify the absence of evaluations. In this article, I
address this gap by conducting an empirical exercise in evaluating Brazilian
participation in the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (2004-2017).
I employ a quantitative strategy combining descriptive statistics, Interrupted
Time Series (ITS), and Difference-in-Differences (Diff-in-Diff), using the
Dominican Republic as a control group. The results indicate heterogeneous but
substantial effects. The ITS reveals an immediate and statistically significant
increase in the trade balance (US$ 41 million), significant growth in the
Foreign Policy Index (FPI), and a positive trend in financial congruence (R² =
0.734). The Diff-in-Diff model confirms that, after 2004, Haiti's FPI increased
by 0.025 points (p &lt; 0.01) beyond that observed in the control group,
representing a 2.5% increase in the index. A downward trend in violent deaths is
also observed over the period. I show, therefore, that it is possible to
empirically monitor and evaluate foreign policy, even in the face of its
specificities. By shifting the focus of the normative debate to a concrete
methodological application, I am trying to contribute to consolidating
M&amp;A/PE as a productive agenda in the APE, with implications for
institutional strengthening, democratic transparency and the improvement of
Brazilian foreign policy.
