Title: "Literary Incest" : intertextuality and writing the last taboo in the novels of Iris Murdoch
Authors: Emma V. Miller
ID: openalex.W1541743375
URL: 

Throughout her literary oeuvre Iris Murdoch displayed a preoccupation with the
theme of incest, a consideration which has not previously been examined in a
full length critical study. Her portrayal of the incest taboo is examined here
in relation to incest as an abusive practice, which is the predominant image of
the subject throughout her fiction. Examining the changes in scientific and
cultural attitudes to incest in the post-war era, this thesis explores Murdoch’s
literary interaction with these developments and how her writing reflects and
challenges the social perspective contemporaneous with her individual works. The
argument is concerned with the relationship between intertextuality and incest
in Murdoch’s fiction and how she utilises an intertextual approach to confront
dominant literary trends within the Western canon, occasioning the reader to
reconsider the views presented by well-known literary and cultural narratives
and their modes of expression. The examination of other ‘texts’ is not limited
to the written word but to any art object which conveys a culturally recognised
narrative and which relates to her presentation of the incest taboo. Incest was
brought to the public forum partly by the second wave of feminism and the
revelation of incest abuse coincided with the public recognition of child abuse
more generally and thereby occasioned concern over the rights of children.
Accordingly, therefore, this thesis focuses on the impact of a history of
patriarchal domination on the suppression of women and children, and how this
has affected the ability for incest victims to find a means of expression within
a language, and therefore a literary culture, defined and designed by others.
Murdoch is approached here through her concern with gendered stories and
gendered means of communication, not in order to privilege one sex over the
other but, anticipating third-wave feminism, employing them as a means to
dispense with sexual difference and sexual expectations, in order to reach an
androgynous narrative. Such literary concerns can be seen to draw not only from
a process of the cultural evolution of narratives, but also out of the wider
literary sphere, to affect social change.
