Title: Attachment and 'amae' : a comparative study of mother-child close relationships in Japan and Britain
Authors: Kaori Komatsu
ID: openalex.W1489088802
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/1842/6196

Attachment theory addresses the young child’s biological and psychological need
to elicit their mother’s protection and care, and seeks to explain the emotional
bond that forms between them in the early years of life. Several researchers
have pointed out that the Western concept of attachment might be less relevant
for Japanese parent-child dyads because Japanese child-rearing ideals are based
on the concept of ‘amae’ (emotional one-ness between mother and child), whereas
attachment theory emphasises the link between attachment and
independence/autonomy. Research to date, however, has not yet directly addressed
the possible association between maternal amae attitudes and attachment patterns
in Japanese mother-child dyads. This is, in part, due to the current lack of any
assessment tool to measure mothers’ responses to their child’s amae behaviours.
Japanese attachment patterns have also not yet been investigated using the
Manchester Child Attachment Story Task (MCAST: Green et al., 2000), a doll-play
attachment measurement for children aged between 4 and 8 years old which has
been used in Western contexts. This doctoral thesis consists of three cross-
cultural empirical studies which address this gap in the current literature. In
the first study, a 39-item prototype amae attitude scale (AAS) was constructed
based on responses from Japanese focus groups and an earlier study of amae
behaviours (Vereijken et al., 1997). The scale was subsequently completed by
Japanese and British mothers. Japanese mothers were found to be more tolerant in
general than British mothers of their child’s amae behaviours, in all 4 sub-
categories explored (pure, asking, frustrated, and anxious amae), with cultural
differences most marked in maternal attitudes towards their children’s anxious-
amae behaviour. The second study addressed two questions: whether attachment
behaviours differ in Japanese and British 4-5 year olds (measured with the
MCAST) and whether there is a relationship between children’s MCAST attachment
classifications and maternal attitudes towards children’s amae behaviours
(measured with the AAS) in Japanese and British dyads. Contrary to what has been
found in some of the previous Japanese Strange Situation studies, the
distribution of MCAST attachment classifications was similar in the two
countries. As predicted from the results of study 1, the AAS scores of Japanese
mothers also indicated that they were significantly more tolerant of their
child’s amae behaviours than their British counterparts. This was true for both
mothers of securely and insecurely attached children. A tendency for mothers of
securely attached children to have less tolerant attitudes towards children’s
amae behaviours than those of insecurely attached children was found in both
countries. A cultural difference also emerged in the way children expressed the
maternal needs of the child doll during the mildly stressful scenarios in the
MCAST. The third study examined actual mother-child interaction in both
countries, measuring the mother’s emotional availability to the child (using the
Emotional Availability Scale: Biringen, 2000) and relating this to both maternal
AAS and child MCAST data. The results showed that emotional availability scores
and attachment classification patterns did not differ across cultures. Analysis
of the home observations also indicated that children from both cultures who
were classified as insecurely attached (ambivalent and disorganised type) in the
MCAST tended to show more amae behaviours towards their mothers than children
classified as securely attached. Together, these three studies suggest that
children in both counties show similar attachment patterns and that it is not
only Japanese children who express amae behaviours towards their mothers. In
fact, amae relates to attachment security in both cultures, although the way it
is expressed and maternal attitudes towards such behaviours differ across
cultures.
