Title: The Musical and Personal Biographies of Adolescents with Foster Care experience
Authors: Michael L. Zanders
ID: openalex.W34206564
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/20.500.12613/3909

This qualitative study examines the personal and musical lives of adolescents
with foster care experience. Based on the researcher's experience, it seemed
that foster care adolescents had a different life experience with music than
adolescents who were never in foster care. A structured interview, developed by
the researcher, was used with a sample of 10 participants (6 males, 4 females)
enrolled in out-patient therapy. Participants were chosen based on three
criteria: 1) between the ages of 13-18 years, 2) present or past experience in
foster care placements, and 3) willing and able to discuss their lives and
musical backgrounds. Biographical inquiry was the specific method used to gather
data on the musical lives of adolescents in foster care and to discern how the
musical and personal biographies may have been related to one another. In this
context, a musical biography was defined as the sum total of music experiences a
person has had and the various meanings given to them, both in the past and
present. It was assumed that one's musical life is part of one's personal
biography, which also includes non musical events, experiences, and meanings.
The study was organized according to two basic questions: 1) What music
experiences had these adolescents in foster care had throughout their life span,
and what meanings had they attached to those experiences, and 2) What
relationships could be found between the musical and personal biographies?
Results of the study showed that these adolescents with foster care experience
used music consciously and actively in their everyday lives, similar to ways
that adolescents with no foster care experience do. For example, adolescents
with and without foster care experience share the same listening habits, music
preferences, and how they use music. The results also showed that the music
experiences of these adolescents did affect their life in foster care, and that
their life in foster care did affect their overall relationship to music. In
regards to foster care's influence on an adolescent's relationship to music, the
results showed that when an adolescent had a relationship to music that was
shared with a biological family member before foster care, this music
relationship ceased when the participant entered foster care. Also, adolescents
generally had a positive relationship with their foster family when involvement
with music was encouraged. Conversely, music influenced the foster care
experience of these adolescents. First, listening to music by oneself tended to
increase in frequency and importance when the adolescent did not have a positive
relationship or healthy attachment with the foster parent. Second, formal and
active involvement in music (e.g., participating in school or group music, or
taking lessons) seemed to be associated with a positive or healthy relationship
with the foster family. Third, adolescents tended to listen to music for
personal, psychological reasons, often to cope with the trauma, grief, and loss
they continued to encounter throughout their lives. Implications for music
therapy research, theory, and practice were drawn based on the conclusions.
