Title: Singing knowledge: Aesthetics, authority, and gender in Skyrian music (Greece)
Authors: Angela Glaros
ID: openalex.W311119772
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/2142/26329

Based on ethnographic fieldwork conducted in 2007-08 in Skyros, Greece, this
dissertation examines the gendered tensions at the heart of performances of
Skyrian vocal music. A small Aegean island with approximately 3,000 inhabitants,
Skyros prides itself on a distinctive expressive culture that prominently
features the masquerading and satirical performances of the pre-Lenten Carnival,
for which the island is well known beyond Greece, as well as the less famous a
cappella “table songs” (traghoudhia tis tavlas) performed at religious festivals
and other celebrations. Because such modes of music-making on Skyros engage
local history, memory and identity, singers use their performances at Carnival,
festivals, and other events as metaperformative commentaries on the nature of
community belonging, such that singing constitutes a claim to social, political,
and musical knowledge, even as it provides the grounds on which such claims may
be contested. I approach “singing knowledge,” along two intersecting axes: the
sensual, embodied aesthetics of singing and of listening to song—and the
relations of power that suffuse people’s judgments not only about a singer’s
musical expertise but also about a singer’s authority to represent the
community. &#13;\n\tApproaching musical performances as embodied enactments of
social personhood in meaning-laden spaces, my research resonates with recent
calls for a “vocal anthropology” that considers the voice as “the material
embodiment of social ideology and experience” (Feld et al. 2004:332). I frame my
examination of aesthetics, authority and gender in vocal music on Skyros both in
relation to the largely antiphonal musical texture of Skyrian songs, in which
singers alternate verses in a call-and-response fashion, and to the social
aesthetic of reciprocity and commensality that Skyrians identified as crucial to
the highly local knowledge embedded in their musical forms. &#13;\n\tI consider
“singing knowledge” across a range of performative sites, including Carnival,
Greek Orthodox Christian liturgical chanting, and Skyrian religious festivals.
While performances in each of these sites enact gendered conceptions of space as
well as of sound, each scenario also exceeds its spatial and temporal bounds
such that they index and inform one another in individual performances. The
seemingly disparate arenas of “secular” and “sacred” vocal music share not only
a musical and social aesthetic but also a set of gendered tensions that animates
musical performances in each site. Addressing questions of emotion, aesthetics,
authority and gender in the performance of both religious and secular musical
knowledge on Skyros, this project contributes to the global study of music,
embodiment and social relations.
