Title: Pedagogy in Practice: Lived Experiences of Kodály-Inspired Music Educators
Authors: Leigh Ann Mock Garner
ID: openalex.W2151287062
URL: https://ir.stthomas.edu/caps_ed_lead_docdiss/2

The problem of this dissertation was to identify and analyze certain learning
modalities to determine to what extent they are linked to and function in the
teaching of musical elements when nested in a Kodály-inspired instructional
sequence. Specifically, what are the pedagogical characteristics and
implications for the teacher and, by extension the learner when engaged in the
teaching/learning of aural, kinesthetic, oral and visual activities in the
preparation and practice of musical elements?\nThe research methods employed in
this study were structured based upon the nature of phenomenology, defined by
Creswell (2007) and Van Manen (1990), and grounded theory, defined by Charmaz
(2006). The data were generated from classroom observations, interviews with
teacher participants, and a research journal. Rich description of the phenomenon
of Kodály-inspired music instruction was the basis for the development of
theoretical structures about aural, oral, kinesthetic, and visual learning.\nThe
findings in this study indicate that the intentional creation and implementation
of modality-based musical learning experiences is critical to developing
students’ abilities to intellectually process musical elements. Further, the
following modalities sequence was identified as a result of the collected data:
aural, kinesthetic, oral, and visual. The data that emerged from the modality-
based learning experiences served as the genesis for formulating the following
eight theoretical constructs, which capture the essence of the major findings
for this research: 1. Educators must develop aural learning experiences that
lead to aural literacy. The pedagogical aural activities that lead to these
experiences are rooted in and extrapolated from a sequential curricular
structure. 2. Teachers must design aural learning experiences in which the vii
students are asked to rely on information embedded in their aural memory to
identify known and unknown musical information, e.g., melodic and rhythmic
elements and/or musical elements. 3. Physical movement in the teaching/learning
process is a pathway to the cognitive processing of subject matter. 4. Teachers
employ physical movement as a pathway to achieving students’ musical expression,
performance, and demonstration of overall knowledge of the subject of music. 5.
Oral learning experiences are created by teachers to help students verbally
articulate their ability to process cognitively the nature of music material. 6.
Teachers implement oral learning experiences with the intent to elicit students’
cognitive abilities to process the symbolic function of language executed
through performance of the subject. 7. Leading students to unlock the symbolic
language of music visually requires pedagogical aural, kinesthetic, and oral
precursors in the acquisition of the visual understanding and music making. 8.
There is a symbolic relation among aural, kinesthetic, oral, and visual learning
that combine to complement and reinforce each other to inform the
teaching/learning process of music.
