Title: Trapped between a Rock and a Hard Place: What Counts as Information Literacy in the Workplace and How Is It Conceptualized?
Authors: Annemareé Lloyd
ID: openalex.W2108530920
URL: https://doi.org/10.1353/lib.2011.0046

Information literacy has been proclaimed as a foundational literacy of the
twenty-first century by many researchers, library practitioners, and
international agencies. However, there is still disagreement about how
information literacy is conceptualized and what key elements constitute the
practice. This disagreement has led to the practice/skills debate that has
emerged from workplace research into information literacy. It has also led to
claims that research into information literacy lacks theoretical framing from
which models can be grounded. While the library and higher education sector
concentrate on information skills that are claimed to be generic and
transferable, there is little evidence from workplace research to suggest that
this is indeed the case. In fact, the opposite appears to be true: that
information literacy is enacted as a situated, collective, and embodied practice
that engages people with information and knowledge about domains of action that
are authorized by the discourses of the setting. Consequently the information
skills and competencies that are developed reflect the discursive practices of
the setting. Without information literacy, other work-related practices and
performances couldn't be accomplished; however, the continued focus on skills
limits our ability to understand information literacy as a socially enacted
practice, one that is constructed through a range of social activities. The
issue therefore is how to represent the social activities that underpin
information literacy. This article conceptualizes information literacy from a
workplace perspective and presents ongoing work toward a theoretical framework.
It advances the view that information literacy appears to be trapped between "a
rock and a hard place." The rock is the current conception of information
literacy, which is unsatisfactory, because it is confined by the discursive
practices of the education sector and does not account for the complex social
processes that inform learning to work. The hard place is the translation of
information literacy practice with an understanding of how this practice
happens, that is, from the education sector into workplace performance. Drawing
from empirical studies, this article will explore the current key issues related
to workplace information literacy.
