Title: Encompassing the Intolerable: Laughter, Memory, and Inscription in the Fiction of John McGahern
Authors: John Keegan Malloy
ID: openalex.W178213384
URL: https://epublications.marquette.edu/dissertations_mu/113

Encompassing the Intolerable examines John McGahern's depiction of individual
consciousness struggling with postcolonial Ireland's three dominant and
interconnected institutions: nation, family, and the Catholic Church. While
McGahern's work, especially the early fiction, is often considered unremittingly
bleak, this study argues that his exposure of abuse, repression, and
disillusionment within these institutions does not finally entail a pessimistic
vision. Instead, through close readings emphasizing character and epiphany, I
contend that his texts use the motifs of laughter, memory, and inscription to
demonstrate how consciousness can accommodate intolerable realities such as
violence and loss rather than becoming defined or controlled by them. Moreover,
these motifs trace a progression of subjectivity from survival (laughter) to
private identity (memory) to public identity (inscription). Through this
process, I argue that McGahern's fiction uncovers a guarded sense of continuity
with the above institutions and the awareness that they provide the raw
materials for (re)constructing a valid worldview. Chapter 2 argues that for
McGahern's physically or psychically wounded characters, a self-reflexive and
dianoetic laugh functions as a minimum confirmation of subjectivity and prepares
consciousness to encompass the intolerable. Chapter 3 examines McGahern's
portrayal of the extraordinary power of memory to revivify images, refrains, or
narratives, and argues that characters who successfully encompass a traumatic
past do so by relinquishing the will to power expressed by silence or dogmatic
interpretations of individual or collective history. Instead, these characters
construct and continually revise dissertation-ended narratives and find that
meaning resides in the recounting of such narratives rather than in affixing a
final and singular meaning to events. Chapter 4 looks at both the public role of
the writer and his or her audience. I argue that McGahern's writing protagonists
trace an approach to point-of-view that moves from a defensive posture of
isolation and recrimination toward an dissertation posture based on community
and forgiveness, and that the latter elicits new ways to encompass the
intolerable.
