Title: Parents' experiences of caring for a child with a cleft lip and/or palate: a review of the literature
Authors: Pauline Nelson, Anne‐Marie Glenny, Susan Kirk, Ann‐Louise Caress
ID: openalex.W2144356045
URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2214.2011.01244.x

This review brings together for the first time the existing quantitative and
qualitative research evidence about the experiences of parents caring for a
child with a cleft. It summarizes salient themes on the emotional, social and
service-related experiences of parents and critiques the literature to date,
comparing it with wider, selected literature from the field of children's long-
term conditions, including disability. The review suggests that there are
similarities and differences between the literatures, in terms of research focus
and approach. Similarities are found across children's conditions in the
perspectives of parents on emotional, social and service-related aspects,
although much of the cleft literature is focused on the early stages of
children's lives. However, the quality of cleft research to date about parents'
experiences has also been variable, with a narrow emphasis on cross-sectional,
deficit-orientated psychological approaches focused mainly on mothers. Despite a
substantial literature, little qualitative research has examined parents'
perspectives in-depth, particularly about their child's treatment journey. This
contrasts with the wider children's literature, which has traditionally drawn
not only on psychological approaches but also on the broader perspectives of
sociology, social policy, nursing and health services research, using both
qualitative and quantitative methods, often in integrated ways. Such approaches
have been able to highlight a greater range of experiences from both mothers and
fathers, about caring for a child with a long-term condition and views about
treatment. The review identifies a lack of comparable research in the cleft
field to examine parents' experiences and needs at different stages of their
children's lives. Above all, research is needed to investigate how both mothers
and fathers might experience the long-term and complex treatment journey as
children become older and to elicit their views about decision making for cleft
treatments, particularly elective surgeries.
