Title: What are the experiences of those attending a self help hearing voices group: an interpretative phenomenological approach
Authors: Gemma Louise Hendry
ID: openalex.W1803958718
URL: 

Introduction: Self-help Hearing Voices Groups (HVG) have grown in popularity
here in the UK, and internationally, since the 1980s. Despite research into the
potential benefits of attending self-help groups for other mental health
problems, little is known about their potential benefit for voice hearers. The
present study was designed to explore the experiences of those attending one
self-help Hearing Voices Group in the UK.&#13;\n&#13;\nMethods: A homogenous
convenience sample of seven adults aged between 28 and 48 years old was
recruited and participants were interviewed using a semi-structured interview
schedule. Interviews were transcribed and analysed using Interpretative
Phenomenological Analysis. Analysis was conducted for individual participants in
the first instance. Following this, a group analysis was conducted across
participants to identify master and super-ordinate themes.&#13;\n&#13;\nResults:
Six master themes and eight super-ordinate themes emerged following the group
analysis. Participants experienced the group as A Secure Base which offered the
opportunity for Coming Together to Help Ourselves. As well as benefits of
attending the group, participants also discussed challenging aspects to their
experience; Threats to Engagement and Vicarious Experience. Participants
experienced the group as A Catalyst for Change in terms of social and
psychological recovery. Finally, participants talked about the sense of
Belonging to a Special Tribe which offered mutual acceptance and social
inclusion.&#13;\nDiscussion: The main findings of the research project are
discussed in relation to existing psychological theories of groups and research
into the effectiveness of self-help groups in other clinical contexts. The
research adds to the existing knowledge base in terms of exploring how
participants developed attachments to the group and its members. Implications
for the potential benefits of attending self-help Hearing Voices Groups are
discussed. Finally, the clinical implications for Clinical Psychologists working
with voices and with self-help Hearing Voices Groups are discussed. The research
concludes with recommendations for areas of further research.
