Title: When Sixteen ain't So Sweet: Rethinking the Regulation of Adolescent Sexuality
Authors: Nicole Phillis
ID: openalex.W819313550
URL: https://repository.law.umich.edu/mjgl/vol17/iss2/3

Legally speaking, sexual maturity poses a significant enough liberty interest
for a minor to make medical decisions regarding contraceptive medicine or to
choose motherhood without parental involvement, but not quite enough for her to
obtain an abortion independently. The law incentivizes teenage motherhood by
only granting decisional autonomy to those minors who choose to have a child;
the minor female's right to procreate vests regardless of her individual
maturity. The law discourages teenage abortions by using the choice to terminate
a pregnancy to trigger a presumption of immaturity; the minor female's abortion
right is pitted against personal autonomy via parental rights. Ultimately, this
Article argues that sexually active minors, their children, and their parents
all suffer in this reproductive catch-22. This Article contends that the
conflict between age of consent laws and minor abortion restrictions is just one
illustration of state legislatures' struggles within the greater protecnionist-
versus-enablement paradigm. Specifically, this Article argues that laws
regulating adolescent sexuality can generally be categorized into one of two
types: (1) protectionist, enacting restrictions and protections designed to
compensate for minors' categorical immaturity; or (2) enabling, recognizing
adult-like capacity and rights in minors as they progress in their overall
development. The result of this polarized statutory landscape can only
adequately be described as "legislative schizophrenia"-although devoid of
invidious intent, these statutes ultimately hurt minors because they are
premised on a flawed paradigm that is unable to coordinate the different
political and social goals of state legislatures. This Article argues that by
recognizing consensual maturity for intercourse and pregnancy but then
rescinding that presumptive maturity only for abortion, states both violate the
Constitution and create dangerous public policy. Specifically, states violate
legally-consenting minors' substantive due process rights by imposing undue
burdens on their abortion access without any legitimate, countervailing
immaturity interest. While parental notification and consent laws have been
upheld on the grounds of minor immaturity, this Article argues that the
recognition of sexual maturity through age of consent laws should also trigger a
presumption of maturity for minor abortion rights. This Article further
highlights five key policy concerns created by the inconsistent regulation of
adolescent sexuality: (1) the encouragement of impulsive adolescent sexual
behaviors; (2) the binding of decisional autonomy to pregnancy outcome; (3) the
reinforcement of paternalistic gender stereotypes; (4) the punitive, rather than
protective, natre of parental involvement and judicial bypass; and (5) the
continued hystericization of adolescent sexuality.
