Title: Professional Identity and Self-concept of Estonian Social Workers
Authors: Tiia Tamm
ID: openalex.W95274080
URL: https://trepo.tuni.fi/handle/10024/66631

After decades of forced interruption the social work profession development
started again in 1990´s. Since then social work is a rapidly developing
profession in Estonian society. Now, when there is more than fifteen years of
work practice, professional development and academic teaching, it is time to
research how social workers experience self-development and development of
social work profession.\n\nThe theoretical framework of this research ties
together different conceptions of social workers self and professional self
context, professional growth and factors supporting it and development of social
work profession in society. Important models and theories in this research are
London and Mone´s (1987) three-dimensional interpretation of factors motivating
professional growth (with professional identity as one dimension of thereof),
conceptions of development of professional identity and professional growth
according to Dubin (1990), Farr and Middlebrooks (1990), Maurer and Tarulli
(1994), Ruohotie (1995, 1999), Ruohotie?s (2005) theory of growth-oriented
atmosphere and model of Lord, Brown and Freiberg (1999) about working self-
concept.\n\nThe study goal is to describe the development of professional
identity and opportunities for professional growth of social workers and get an
overview of the self-concept tendencies of social workers and social work
students; understand how social workers perceive the development of a new
profession based on their experiences.\n\nThe sample (N=122) consisted of social
workers that had received academic education in the Tallinn University
(N1=41/vilistlased), undergraduate students of the Open University engaged in
practical social work, who one month after participating in the survey graduated
from the university with a BA degree (N2=52/lõpetajad) and future social
workers, first year social work students (N=29/statsionaar). The criterion for
inclusion in the sample was academic vocational education from the Tallinn
University.\n\nThe present research is descriptive multi-strategy research,
where the first part of the research is survey type and the second part is based
on theme interviews and covers the conceptions of social workers about their
development to professional social workers and development of the social work
profession in Estonian society.\n\nSurvey data were analyzed by using
statistical methods (factor analysis, bivariate correlation, variance analysis)
in order to describe and explain relation between self-concept and professional
identity of social workers; and to find the differences between the sample
groups. Survey results show that social workers´ and social work students´ self-
concept components are empathy, innovativeness, self-confidence and need of
achievement. These self-identity components are extremely suitable for shaping
the social workers professional identity. Professional-self of social workers is
characterized by commitment to work, professional growth, willingness to take
risk and ability to cooperate. They also feel togetherness and strong commitment
to collective (work team). All above mentioned characteristics form the basis
for the development of professional identity of social workers.\n\nThe
qualitative data added depth and context to the results of survey. On the basis
of the conceptions of social workers, the qualitative content analysis brought
out eight main categories and fifty-three subcategories. These categories show
professional identity elements of social workers and different aspects of their
work on the basis of conceptions of social workers about their experiences of
their personal development and the development of social work profession in the
newly independent Estonia.\n\nRespondents have all experienced stress and as
social work is stressful to psyche, the workers? psychosocial coping should not
be just their personal work problem. However, the organizational support
mechanisms (such as supervision services) are not available for everyone and
therefore social workers have only few personal coping strategies at their
disposal support from the colleagues (who are also burdened) or family and
network of friends. Too often, work difficulties also bring social workers too
often to the limits of their endurance there is too much bureaucracy and
politicization.\n\nResearch results describe social workers as innovative and
ready to take risks enterprising people with strong self-confidence and strong
need for achievement. Surprisingly, the features remind one of successful
entrepreneurs in the business field. All this might be explained by the fact
that in our society both social system and social work profession are in
developmental phase, the well-organised system waits yet to be established.
During the developmental phase the people participating in the process have more
opportunities to find different workable solutions but they also have to be more
creative and driven to implement a vision.\n\nBased on my research results it
may be concluded that in the future social work may be threatened by lack of
recognition. Social workers are often left alone with their heavy workload and
they do not receive necessary understanding and support from their organization
nor society in general (lack of recognition is proved by the relatively low
level of salaries). As there is a clear need of professionals in social work,
the society and organizations should support these professionals with strong
professional identity and growth motivation that are committed to their work.
There should be more acknowledgement and support e.g. with salary rise and by
enabling every social worker with supervision service, before the number of
those leaving from the field due to the burnout increases.\n\nIn summary, it can
be said that the research has shed light upon professional identity and
professional growth of social workers and the development of social work
profession in Estonia. As social work as profession has been little researched
in Estonia, it is natural that this research brought out many topics that would
need further research. New knowledge is needed in vocational education, it would
also be used to help and support social workers in their work environment.
