Title: The Rhetoric of Evidence in Recent Documentary Film and Video
Authors: Steven Schoen
ID: openalex.W2141723003
URL: https://digitalcommons.usf.edu/etd/4399

Documentary is a genre of film that portrays "real" events using depictions that
connote the objectivity and facticity implied by the processes of photorealism.
Many contemporary documentary theorists and critics observe a constitutive
problem in this ethos: despite the apparent constructions and agendas of
documentary filmmaking, the framing and assumption of documentary as a window on
the world tend to naturalize its own constructions as "real." Critics who engage
documentary trace the multitude of ways this problem plays out in particular
films. These projects yield many important insights, but they most often
approach documentary as a form of inherently deficient representation fraught
with ethical questions-- questions created by the frame and ethos of objectivity
it fails to achieve. Are events portrayed truthfully? Are people depicted
fairly? Are filmmakers misrepresenting?\nIn this study I seek to show that a
rhetorical approach to documentary shifts the critical focus to instead examine
how documentary constructions and images work as evidence in the claims and
rhetorical agendas of documentary. I study recent film texts (2000-2012) that
explicitly and primarily structure their documentary materials as evidence for
the truth of an argument or interpretation, and I argue that documentaries, when
they work as documentary, establish and verify their depictions as evidence by
drawing on the elements of their "scene." I use Kenneth Burke's dramatistic
approach to observe that the "real world" as depicted in documentary is at once
experienced as representation of the world outside the documentary, but also
constructed as the scene of a dramatization. Understanding the dramatism of
documentary helps me to characterize what I call a "rhetoric of evidence" that
may be particular to documentary expression. In the films I study documentary
"scene" interacts at key moments and particular ways to locate the events of
films in the "real world," not just as evidence that something is real, but also
as meaningful for particular arguments and rhetorical moves.\nThis study reveals
the often extremely subtle ways that documentaries wield the influence of
"truth," and also offers filmmakers an understanding of how evidence might be
deployed more deliberately to present a social world that is open for
transformation.
