Title: Loneliness among University Students: Predictive Power of Sex Roles and Attachment Styles on Loneliness.
Authors: Tahsin İlhan
ID: openalex.W1559370467
URL: http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1002853.pdf

AbstractThis study examined the predictive power of sex roles and attachment
styles on loneliness. A total of 188 undergraduate students (114 female, and 74
male) from Gazi University completed the Bem Sex Role Inventory, UCLA Loneliness
Scale, and Relationship Scales Questionnaire. Hierarchic Multiple Regression
analysis and t-test were used to test hypotheses. Results indicated that there
was no gender difference in loneliness. Also results revealed from Hierarchic
Multiple Regression analyses that loneliness was predicted by fearful
attachment, secure attachment, and masculinity, respectively in total samples.
Additional analysis indicated that predictive power of masculinity was
significant on loneliness only for men.Key WordsLoneliness, Gender, Sex Roles,
Attachment.Loneliness is one of the most painful experiences (Russell, Peplau, &
Cutrona, 1980; Wei, Shaffer, Young, & Zakalik, 2005) that can be encountered in
all periods of life, from adolescence to old age (Cacioppo, Hughes, Waite,
Hawkley, & Thisted, 2006). Each individual can define the loneliness issue in
his or her own terms, regardless of ethnic origin, religion, socio-economic
status, gender or age (Rokach, 2004). However, loneliness is by nature a
subjective experience, which can be evaluated according to what a person expects
from his or her relationships with others and the personal satisfaction obtained
from these relationships. People may perceive themselves as lonely in a crowd
while they may not feel loneliness when they are alone (Qualter & Munn, 2002).
Peplau and Perlman (1982) define loneliness as an unpleasant subjective
psychological state when happens inconsistency difference between existing
social relationships and desired social relationships. In the literature some
disagreement exists in terms of whether loneliness is unidimensional or not. For
example, Russell, Peplau, and Cutrona (1980) assume that loneliness is a
unidimensional universal phenomenon affecting all aspects of life. On the other
hand, Weiss conceptualizes that loneliness has two dimensions: Social loneliness
and emotional loneliness. Also Sadler and Johnson (1980) claim that loneliness
is a multidimensional construct consisted of cosmic, social, interpersonal, and
emotional.In last three decades, researches on loneliness have significantly
contributed on understanding of antecedents and consequences of loneliness. In
this studies, some factors such as social skills deficits (Deniz, Hamarta, &
Ari, 2005; DiTommaso, Brannan-McNulty, Ross, & Burgess, 2003), negative
expectations and attributions (Jones, Hobbs, & Hockenbury, 1982; Peplau,
Russell, & Heim, 1979; Vitkus & Horowitz, 1987), shyness (Wei, Shaffer Young, &
Zakalik, 2005), unsecure attachment (Bogaerts, Vanheule, & Desmet, 2006;
DiTommaso, Brannen, & Burgers, 2005), deficiency in perception of social support
(Yilmaz, Yilmaz, & Karaca, 2008) and maladaptive family structure (Demirci-Yoraz
& Demir, 2009) are shown as reasons of loneliness. Depend on degree and aspect
of loneliness, physiological and psychological problems such as depression
(Alpass & Neville, 2003; Cacioppo et al., 2006; Weeks, Michela, Peplau, & Bragg,
1980), cardio-vascular problems (Hawkley, Burleson, Berntson, & Cacioppo, 2003),
suicide attempts (Wenz, 1977), substance uses (McWhirter, 1990), poor life
satisfaction (Cecen, 2007a) could occur.Weiss (1973) has pointed out attachment
styles as one of the reasons for loneliness. According to Weiss, loneliness is
separation distress when someone leaves a person to whom he or she is attached.
Firstly, when the relationship between a child and mother or caregiver did not
establish a feeling of confidence in early childhood, the feeling of loneliness
occurs each time the person leaves an object of significant emotional
importance. According to attachment theory (Bowlby, 1969, 1973), the ties
between child and the mother, or the person who looks after the child, brings
children their first understanding that they are not alone while discovering the
world and they have someone to trust. …
