Title: Taiwanese girls' self-portraiture on a social networking site
Authors: Yin-Han Wang
ID: openalex.W1566750180
URL: 

An increasing number of young girls produce contents in social media on a
everyday basis for the opportunities to express, explore and connect. Public
misunderstanding and &#13;\nconcern are about whether girls are being
narcissistic and vain. Academic works address how girls exercise agency while
negotiating structure in the construction of their gendered adolescent
identities. This thesis is situated in relation to our hopes and fears about
girls’ self-representation through digital media production, and examines the
role &#13;\nthat photographic self-portraiture plays in girls’ social relations,
personal and gender identity work.&#13;\nThe theoretical framework combines the
perspectives of gender performativity and symbolic interactionism, supplemented
by analyses of personal photography. This thesis chose as its case study the
popular Taiwanese social networking site Wretch, and employed a mixed method of
quantitative content analysis of 2000 self-portraits of &#13;\nteenagers to
understand how they represent themselves, and qualitative online interviews with
42 girls aged 13-20 to learn about their relationships with self-
portraiture.&#13;\nThe content analysis shows that most teenagers represent
themselves in a gender stereotypical manner, while some adopt non gender-
specific styles to represent themselves as friendly, suggesting that teenagers
may use ideals about femininity, masculinity and sociality as shortcuts to
present themselves in a positive light. Interview findings reveal how girls use
camera technologies and the affordance of SNS for visual self-disclosure, which
isimportant for the development of theirinterpersonal relationships. The
findings also suggest that self-portraiture is not simply an act of
photographing a ‘reality’ of the self, but of formulating self-image(s) and
identity in the process of making self-portraits. In self-portraiture, girls are
constantly confronted with the ‘who am I’ question, and construct and revise
their biographies as they manage an &#13;\narray of audiences from different
contexts all collapsing in one space. Furthermore, selfportraiture creates a
distance between the ‘I’ and the ‘me’, allowing one to ‘play’ with &#13;\nself-
image(s) and identity. It creates a space for the negotiation of ideals and
anxieties, for experiments with different subject positions that may be socially
or individually rewarding, and it is through these seemingly casual
endeavoursthat one gradually works out their position in the social world. The
thesis contributes to the scholarship on girls’ media culture, and suggests
current theoretical perspective be expanded in order to better &#13;\nunderstand
different ways of ‘doing girlhood’.
