Title: The narrative epidemiology of L'Aquila 2009 earthquake
Authors: M Casacchia, R. Pollice, Rita Roncone
ID: openalex.W2163602525
URL: https://doi.org/10.1017/s2045796011000801

The authors describe their experience working and living in L'Aquila, where at
3.32 a.m., early in the morning of 6 April 2009, a 6.3 Richter magnitude
earthquake caused serious damages to this 13th century town (with a population
of 72 000 and a health district of 103 788), in the mountainous Abruzzo region
and to several medieval hill villages in the surrounding areas: 309 residents
were killed, over 1600 were injured, 66 000 residents were displaced, and, the
centre of L'Aquila, the main historical and artistic centre of Abruzzo, was
totally destroyed. Here is described the work done at the Psychiatric Unit of
the General Hospital of L'Aquila and in the University. The Authors report the
incidence rate of Acute Stress Disorder (ASD) in help-seekers (full ASD 4.9%,
and partial ASD 39.3%), and of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) found in
different samples of population (range 12-37.5). The authors express their
consideration about which real-world variables can reflect the population
distress and the naturalistic process of recovery in such natural disasters.
After the earthquake they hypothesize that a lot of residents had found their
way to recover through 'writing, telling the story', by analogy with what
narrative medicine asserts, thus estimating the positive effect of 'emotional
disclosure' on health. A large number of materials (books, web-blogs, videos)
were produced by residents and a database of memories was implemented. The
suffering and struggle to recover in the aftermaths of a traumatic experience
often yields remarkable transformations and positive growth. From this point of
view, the authors underline the increased virtual relationships of residents
through Facebook, to cope with the loss of previous social relationships, to get
information about recreational opportunities, or to get organized for public
events, despite their displacement. Many collective demonstrations were
organized and showed the will to actively participate to the processes of
reconstruction of the civil and scientific life of the town. The authors stress
the need to prevent natural disasters, instead of preventing mental disorders
following natural disasters, reporting that seven Italian seismologists and
scientists are on trial for manslaughter, accused to have failed to evaluate the
true risks of L'Aquila earthquake.
