Title: Negotiating musical and pedagogical agency in a learning community : a case of redesigning a group piano vapaa säestys course in music teacher education
Authors: Inga Rikandi
ID: openalex.W2910197483
URL: https://taju.uniarts.fi/handle/10024/6509

The purpose of this study was to design a learning environment in group vapaa
säestys (VS) within the context of music teacher education that supports the
development of students' musical and pedagogical agency, which is seen as the
main goal of music teacher education. VS is a student-centered subject that
concentrates on piano improvisation and accompaniment and playing by ear and
from chord symbols, with emphasis on the process of music making and learning.
It is most often studied with the piano, and the majority of tuition is offered
in the form of one-on-one lessons. All music education students of the Sibelius
Academy study VS for at least three years, of which only the first year studies
(VS1) takes the form of group tuition. As a teacher of VS in higher music
education, my motivation for embarking on this study was underpinned by my own
experiences of teaching VS in a piano laboratory setting, which triggered a need
to evoke change in this specific environment.\n\nThe rationale for this study
arose from the acknowledgment that, despite its student-centered goals, the
student and his or her experiences is often neglected in VS1, which fails to
take account the special characteristics of group tuition. In addition, VS1
usually focuses solely on musical issues and is not seen to have any pedagogical
value. As a result, the VS1 course in the piano laboratory can be viewed as a
badly designed learning environment; the curriculum, pedagogy, and assessment
are mis-aligned with both the goals of VS and the goals of music teacher
education. Through this investigation, I address this issue by aiming to design
a learning environment that helps to align VS1 practices.\n\nWorking in a
pragmatist framework, and adopting a sociocultural view on learning, this study
is situated in the field of practitioner inquiry as a form of generating
knowledge for practice from practice. At the core of this inquiry is a project
where I held a dual role as the teacher-researcher. The inquiry took place in
two cycles of academic years, and it was carried out in collaboration with the
participants with the aim of improving shared educational practices. Although
the context of the study was local, wherein the general aim was to develop this
particular context in terms of better teaching and more effective learning, the
study also aims to broaden the understanding of the ways in which instrumental
courses in higher music education might contribute to the growth of music
teachers and pedagogues.\n\nI collected data by using various sources and
methods during the two cycles of the inquiry, including: a teacher's research
diary, videotaped lessons, videotaped exams, audio recorded group discussions,
audio recorded feedback from colleague teachers, student essays, and individual
follow-up interviews with students. The analysis in turn combines two
approaches: narrative analysis and data driven qualitative content analysis.
Using the narrative approach and triangulating various data sources, I construct
three Vignettes as points of reference when discussing how the negotiated
process of redesigning the VS group course as carried out by the members of the
learning community – the students and the teacher-researcher – changed the
course in terms of curriculum, pedagogy, and assessment. I use data driven
qualitative content analysis to analyze how the students articulated their
experiences of musical and pedagogical agency in this learning environment,
which was designed to facilitate collaboration in and as a learning community.
Based on these accounts, I then proceed to discuss the kind of structure that
would support the development of students' reflexive musical and pedagogical
agency in group VS, within the context of music teacher education.\n\nThe
findings of this study suggest that a learning community can be an important
asset in music teacher education and in VS, because a learning community, once
formed, starts to contribute to the process of teaching and learning by engaging
in creative knowledge creation. Importantly, I found that being able to
alternate between and explore different positions in the community (e.g.
student, teacher, policy maker, researcher) was an important tool in building
agency for both the students and the teacher-researcher. A significant outcome
of the study was an increased level of reflection demonstrated by the students
with regards to their musical and pedagogical agency. This reinforces the need
for music teacher education students to acquire various diverse teaching and
learning experiences as part of their education. The findings of this study also
reinforce the need for music teacher education to align its curriculum,
pedagogy, and assessment with the overall goals of the program, not only at the
general level of the program but also at the level of individual courses
situated in that program, as in the case of the VS1 course.
