Title: Re-storying identities: Young women's narratives of teenage parenthood and educational support
Authors: Jennifer Margaret Hindin-Miller
ID: openalex.W75337119
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10092/7228

Teenage parenting is widely constructed in prevailing research and public
discourse as a social problem, with poor outcomes for parent and child. Teenage
parents are regarded as a drain on state funds, too young to parent well, and at
high risk of social exclusion, both educationally and economically. This thesis
proposes that teenage motherhood is a turning point in a young woman’s life and
identity, which can be an opportunity, rather than a problem, if there is
adequate support for the mother and her child. It considers the role of a New
Zealand School for Teenage Parents in providing this support. Using qualitative
narrative methodology, ten young women, six family members and nine other
members of the School community were interviewed about their experiences of its
culture and practices. Six of the young women were also interviewed to gather
their life stories. Informed by the narrative understanding that we story our
identities from the narrative possibilities available to us within the varied
discursive contexts of our lives, this thesis draws on these life stories to
explore how the young women storied the fashioning of their own identities as
young women, as learners and as young parents. It presents their stories of
childhood and family life, teenage-hood and schooling, pregnancy and parenthood,
their experiences at the School for Teenage Parents, and their lives since
leaving the School, in order to consider the role of the School in supporting
the positive refashioning of their identities. This thesis draws on social
constructionist and narrative theories to interpret the storied contexts of the
young women’s lives, and the role these often constraining and difficult
contexts played in the fashioning of their multiple identities. Māori culturally
responsive pedagogical theories are also drawn on to interpret the culture of
the School for Teenage Parents, and its attempts to provide a supportive and
affirming family or whānau environment for its students, in order to offer them
more positive narrative possibilities of self and identity as young women, as
learners and as young parents.
