Title: Child‐Centred Foster Care: A Rights‐Based Model for Practice
Authors: Henrietta Bond
ID: openalex.W1533727900
URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1099-0860.2012.00427.x

Child-Centred Foster Care: A Rights-Based Model for Practice By Annabel, Goodyer
London : Jessica Kingsley , 2011 ISBN 9781849051743 , 199 pp, £18.99 (pb ) This
is a book which anyone working with children and young people in foster care
needs on his/her shelves. Containing so many direct quotes from young people,
and summarising so much of the existing research into looked-after children’s
opinions, it is an essential source for those who need to challenge practice,
argue a case (either in court or with colleagues, managers, etc.) or simply want
to ensure that they are delivering services that are truly ‘child-centred’.
Goodyer sets out a powerful argument that much of our current practice in
fostering is too heavily influenced by theoretical developmental approaches,
such as attachment theory. She argues that we need to give greater attention to
Butler-Sloss’s remark that ‘the child is a person, not an object of concern’
(Butler-Sloss, 2008, p. 36). Goodyer claims that we are missing many
opportunities to work in partnership with children because we are pathologising
their experiences — rather than listening to their actual wishes. For example, a
child’s problems settling with foster carers may be put down to their inability
to form healthy attachments because of early trauma, whereas, in reality, the
child simply does not like the carers, or is too worried about their own family
to settle in a new situation. ‘What is required is a practice model that draws
on understanding of children and young people as having an entitlement to human
rights, in particular the rights to a private, stable family life’, Goodyer
insists (p. 37). She evidences her claims carefully and methodically, quoting
extensively from studies that have sought the views of children who are care-
experienced. Goodyer also carried out her own direct research into foster
children’s opinions. None of the views she unearths is particularly surprising,
but in their repetitiveness and familiarity, they reinforce the messages so many
children and young people are trying to put across — namely that their concerns
are not listened to or taken seriously enough. What Goodyer also highlights is
the conflict between fostering as a public service, governed by so many
regulations and standards — and a child’s right to a private life. This is a
very powerful argument and is supported again and again by young people’s
comments about their lack of trust of foster carers and social workers. How,
Goodyer asks, can we expect children to feel secure in placements, where they
can be moved at such short notice? Or to feel comfortable about talking to
adults when their confidences are so readily made public? And while Goodyer does
not offer any easy answers to these dilemmas, she does suggest that a greater
awareness of these issues can help improve current practice. If I have any
criticism of this book, it is that I would have liked Goodyer to be bolder in
her suggestions about how the system can be improved. She does mention a number
of individual good practice schemes in the closing sections (although, sadly,
some of these have now come to an end) and she also recommends some general
approaches — such as advocacy, therapeutic interventions, play therapy, etc.,
which can help improve our communication with young people. She also dedicates
the whole of chapter 10 to participation and gives some helpful checklists for
workers to measure their practices against. However, I would have liked to see
more space and emphasis given to her recommendations about changing the way we
recruit foster carers, as this is perhaps the most innovative and thought-
provoking part of the book. Drawing closely from the research, Goodyer argues
that the criteria for selecting carers are weighed too much towards theories of
what children need, rather than focusing on what children really want — which is
‘stable, consistent, caring parental relationships and the sense of belonging
that are enjoyed by most children in the general UK population’ (pp. 182–3). She
does stick her neck out a little to argue that ‘while it is laudable to try to
recruit the best possible carers’ (p. 179), there is no evidence that, for
example, carers who smoke or live in over-crowded conditions are any less
capable of providing the ‘normalcy’ that matters so much to children. However,
as a reader, I would have welcomed more of a rallying cry for an overhaul of
current recruitment practices and more practical suggestions about how we can
achieve change. However, Goodyer’s carefully evidenced and credible approach
will probably be most effective in creating change in the places where it is
most needed — in those areas where paternalistic, adult-focused fostering
services still prevail.
