Title: Growing up with cancer: A qualitative study of the impact of cancer on the experience of growing up
Authors: Peter Lewis
ID: openalex.W577085648
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/2123/9424

Because more young people are surviving cancer than ever before, more young
people than ever before are living with the physical, psychological, emotional
and social consequences of cancer illness and treatment. They do so during a
transitional time of life and much is already known about their experiences of
the physical and psychological effects of cancer illness and treatment. Less is
known about the social consequences as they are experienced in relationship with
other people. This thesis therefore focuses on the social consequences of cancer
illness and treatment in young people who have completed their treatment and
have returned to their usual social worlds. This thesis has two aims. First, to
expand on our current understandings of the experience of young Australians with
cancer by focussing on the period of remission and recovery. Second, to
determine how young Australians conduct social inte ractions in light of their
cancer experience. The thesis will address these aims by answering the research
question: “what is the impact of cancer illness and treatment on the experience
of growing up?” Methodology and Methods A quota sampling strategy ensured we
recruited a balanced sample of women and men and of young people from different
diagnostic categories. Participants ranged in age from 16 to 29 years old at the
time of their first interview. They ranged from 10 to 22 years old at the time
of their diagnosis. I conducted a thematic analysis of 49 interviews collected
from 27 participants guided by the theoretical perspective of Symbolic
Interactionism. Findings At the time of their cancer illness and treatment,
participants became dependent on their families for care. During their period of
remission and recovery, older participants sought to regain the independence
they had lost or given up during thei r period of illness and treatment while
maintaining the! intimac y they had developed with their parents. When treatment
allowed, participants re-entered their usual social worlds where they
experienced heightened levels of attention from their peers. Participants
welcomed some forms of attention while resisting others as they undertook a
process of accommodating their cancer experience into their post-cancer sense of
self. As their social worlds expanded, participants met new acquaintances and
formed new relationships. Participants underwent a difficult process of deciding
how to disclose their cancer history to their new acquaintances and of
negotiating the place of “cancer” in their new relationships. Discussion The
impact of cancer on the process of growing up is evident in relationships with
parents, peers, and new acquaintances. However, the impact is different for
young people in early adolescence, mid-adolescence, late adolescence, and young
adulthood. The diff erence reflects the normal changes in focus on different
relationships during these phases of life. In childhood and early adolescence,
the focus is on relationships with parents. In middle adolescence the focus
shifts to relationships with peers. In late adolescence and young adulthood, the
focus shifts to the young person‟s independence and relationships of a romantic
and/or sexual nature. Conclusion Findings from this study have practical
implications for young people who have had cancer, their parents, peers, and new
romantic and/or sexual partners. The challenge for these groups is to
accommodate the ongoing effects of cancer illness and treatment into their
relationships while young people continue the process of growing up.
