Title: Creative in finding creativity in the curriculum: the CLIL second language classroom
Authors: Russell Cross
ID: openalex.W1984292965
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s13384-012-0074-8

Abstract Modern education is often characterized by a tension between learning
and creativity (Connery et al. in Vygotsky and creativity: A cultural-historical
approach to play, meaning making, and the arts, 2010). “The Arts”—if attended to
at all—is often positioned as a distinct element of the broader curriculum, and
separate from teaching and learning within other curricular domains. Yet,
despite being largely neglected within contemporary social constructivist
literature, Vygotsky’s sociocultural theory of mind (Vygotsky in Mind in
society, 1978; Vygotsky in The collected works of L. S. Vygotsky (Vol. 1:
Problems of general psychology, 1987)) has as its core a fundamental concern for
creativity, affect, and emotion as the basis for human development. This paper
argues that Vygotsky’s understanding of catharsis—in particular, the
transformative potential of emotion—gives cause to rethink the qualitative
nature of pedagogy, and especially the importance of “mundane creativity”
(Holzman in Vygotsky and creativity: A cultural-historical approach to play,
meaning making, and the arts, 2010, p. 27) at the core of teaching and learning.
This, in turn, opens up new possibilities for conceiving of how creativity might
be understood and realized within and across different dimensions of the
curriculum more broadly. For an empirical example to explore these constructs,
the paper considers data from a “content and language integrated learning”
(CLIL) context. Emerging in the mid-1990s as a European response to the success
of the Canadian French immersion method for teaching languages (Johnson and
Swain in Immersion education: International perspectives, 1997), CLIL sets out
several guiding principles for integrating second language (L2) with content to
develop both simultaneously. With a focus on how Japanese mediates a unit of
work on Geography, the study highlights how the integrated language/content
focus affords a space for creative pedagogical engagement in terms of learners
making their own creative choices on what language to use, and how it could be
used, to facilitate the learning of both language and content (Bachman and
Palmer in Language assessment in practice: Developing language assessments and
justifying their use in the real world, 2010; Mahn and John-Steiner in The gift
of confidence: A Vygotskian view of emotions, 2002).
