Title: Queering Transcultural Encounters in Latin American and Francophone Contexts: Space, Identity, and Frenchness
Authors: Luis Navarro-Ayala
ID: openalex.W224028269
URL: https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3ms9k729

ABSTRACT OF THE DISSERTATIONQueering Transcultural Encounters in Latin American
and Francophone Contexts: Space, Identity and FrenchnessbyLuis Navarro-
AyalaDoctor of Philosophy in French and Francophone StudiesUniversity of
California, Los Angeles, 2012Professor Françoise Lionnet, ChairMy dissertation
proposes a new queer transcultural perspective of "Frenchness" as it is
conceived in Latin America and North Africa. This concept plays a noteworthy
role in the formation of queer identities from both of these so-called
"marginal" geographic areas, whether it is represented as a cultural influence
or personified by characters who travel abroad. Using the framework of Queer
Studies, Semiotics, and Transculturalism, I analyze queer subjects who navigate
transcultural spaces and experience cross-cultural encounters in seven works:
José González Castillo's Los Invertidos (Argentina), Alfonso Hernández-Catá's El
ángel de Sodoma (Cuba/Spain), André Gide's L'immoraliste (France), Mohamed
Choukri's Le pain nu (Morocco), and Rachid O.'s narratives Chocolat chaud, Ce
qui reste, and L'enfant ébloui (Morocco). In the Latin American context, the
trope of exclusion is associated with "Frenchness" as sexually deviant and thus
undesirable. Yuri Lotman's semiosphere reveals the ways in which national
culture organizes boundaries to exclude or include un/wanted individuals--and,
more specifically, queer subjects. In the North African context, the
predominantly masculine public space facilitates cross-cultural encounters with
French men, allowing a controversial bond to form between the privileged
European tourist and local impoverished boys. My project uses Homi Bhabha's
cultures of survival and mimicry, as well as Marcel Mauss's gift exchange
relationships, to show how social conditions prevent or allow the younger
participants in these exchanges to develop sexual agency and sites of resistance
to global economic power structures. Finally, my project explores the homosexual
agency and subject formation of a young protagonist thanks to French media in
Morocco. It analyzes the affective attachment and sensorial connection to French
television broadcasts developed by an adolescent who manages to turn public
space into a realm of intimacy. Ultimately, the character transforms his
attraction for racial difference into a source of postcolonial subversion and
forges a new transcultural identity.
