Title: The Mother Language Teaching Program addressing the language, culture, and identity rights of the Cham minority in Ninh Thuan Province, Vietnam
Authors: Can Dai Quang
ID: openalex.W1003129374
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10125/100825

Recognizing that the Cham minority mother language is at high risk of loss in
the Ninh Thuan province, Vietnam and that its heritage, identity, and culture
are therefore also at risk of being lost, the Cham Mother Language Teaching
Program (MLTP) was implemented as an effort to maintain the Cham language and
improve the Cham's minority student education. During its practice and
development, the official gubernatorial evaluation is that the program seems to
have contributed to the maintenance of the Cham language and promotion of Cham
education. However, the stakeholders' perspective and third party comments on
the MLTP have mostly remained silent. The purpose of this study is to understand
the impact of the Cham MLTP on the education of minority students in elementary
schools in the Ninh Thuan province, Vietnam in terms of improving academic
achievement and revitalizing Cham mother language. The study addressed the
following questions: (1) How is the MLTP program viewed by the Cham community in
terms of supporting the Cham children daily usage of the Cham language and
supporting the Cham children to succeed academically in their mainstream
education, and; (2) Between the "traditional" and the standardized writing
system in MLTP, which one is more appropriate for improving the student success
in revitalizing the Cham language, and improving their academic performance in
the mainstream classes? Interviews, surveys and observations of teachers,
students, parents, and educational specialists were conducted with the
collection of secondary data--annual school reports at school, district, and
provincial level, yearly reports of the Cham Textbook Compiling Committee
(CTCC), and 2004 and 2010 UNICEF reports on the status of the education of
ethnic minorities. Qualitative analysis was coupled with a survey approach to
make my research findings robust. The perceptions of stakeholders at all levels
indicated that there is a positive influence of the Cham MLTP at the elementary
level on student performance both in Cham language development and academic
performance in subjects taught in Vietnamese. However this success is not
continued into secondary school or higher levels. There is evidence from
community members that in Ninh Thuan province there is strong support for the
Cham MLTP. Community members believe that Cham MLTP has had an important role in
the maintenance of Cham language and culture. The standardized script is evident
in daily use and has become an important aspect of Cham literacy. More
specifically, I provide information about the Cham MLTP conception and
development, its current status as viewed by the stakeholders and to guide the
development possible trajectories of MLTP in the future in terms of usage of
specific writing systems, teacher training and assigning, MLTP structure and
other institutional supports.
