Title: Infant feeding practices and breastfeeding duration in Japan: A review
Authors: Madoka Inoue, Colin Binns, Keiko Otsuka, Masamine Jimba, Manami Matsubara
ID: openalex.W2083020795
URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/1746-4358-7-15

The Japanese health system places great emphasis on healthy development.
However, the prevalence of Exclusive Breastfeeding at one month postpartum
between 1980 and 2005 has remained unchanged, fluctuating between 42% and 49%.
At the same time, the Any Breastfeeding prevalence has gradually increased from
about 80% to 95%. In 2010, the latest national breastfeeding report showed that
'exclusive' and 'any' breastfeeding rates have improved. However, as the World
Health Organization (WHO) definition of breastfeeding practices was not used in
this study or in other national surveys, it is difficult to interpret these
latest results. While the Japanese government has launched several promotion
projects, there have been few studies and reviews of risk factors that influence
breastfeeding duration. The objectives of this review were to summarise the
factors that have influenced the duration of breastfeeding in Japan to provide
information relevant to breastfeeding promotion programs. A search of electronic
databases in Japanese and English was undertaken up to 2011. The inclusion
criteria for this review were studies that focused on infant feeding practices
and targeted Japanese mothers, fathers, or health professionals, but excluded
mothers' friends and peer groups. In total, 12 articles were selected for the
final analysis. Smoking status, low birth weight of infants and maternal
perceptions of insufficient breast milk supply were negative influences on
breastfeeding duration, while support from husbands/partners is associated with
continued breastfeeding. Some factors that have been found to be associated with
breastfeeding in other countries, including maternal age, family income,
maternal educational levels, and living with grandparents of infants have not
been confirmed in Japan. While the national breastfeeding rates were higher than
other countries of similar health status, inconsistent knowledge of
breastfeeding benefits and inappropriate hospital practices remain in Japan may
be associated with increased the use of infant formula and reduced breastfeeding
duration. Most of the studies reviewed were cross-sectional in design, with only
a limited number of cohort studies. Also many published studies used small
sample sizes. Cohort studies of infant feeding practices with larger sample
sizes are required to monitor trends in rates and risk factors for breastfeeding
outcomes.
