Title: Holistic practice, art, creativity and the politics of recognition
Authors: Lynn Froggett
ID: openalex.W2165042812
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1921/swssr.v11i3.442

A strand of social work thinking that insisted on the art-like nature of
practice has been marginalised in recent years by a scientistic and technical-
rational turn. This has been consolidated by a number of interrelated factors
including competence-led education, managerialism, the audit culture and the
building of a scientific evidence-base. Within healthcare, however, the arts and
humanities are flourishing and are thought to nourish professional creativity
and artistic dimensions of practice. Social work has much to learn about
professional creativity from the arts for health movement, but a detailed
understanding of the ways in which such practice contributes to well-being has
yet to be developed. The paper draws on current research in a cross-professional
community and healthy living centre where the creative process is seen as
central to organisational and personal development. Art, broadly conceived, is
understood as a special instance of creative living: story-telling, poetry,
drama, music and visual arts underpin most of the Centre’s activities and
services. The paper explores ways in which this facilitates the development of a
rich internal symbolic life within the organisation which supports
experimentation and creative illusion. Staff and users are encouraged to find
and use media which foster a distinctively personal creativity and in the
process develop an ability to oscillate between analytic and syncretistic modes
of perception. This supports a practice based on interpersonal recognition and
directed at an integrated conception of health, social care, education and
leisure. A complex view emerges of the relationship between creativity and
recognition and its importance for personal development which is an irreducible
element of wider struggles for recognition in institutional and societal
domains. A practical understanding of this link is strengthened through
narrative, biographical and other creative methodologies, which by virtue of
their holistic view, can help to counter an overly procedural practice.
