Title: Transmedia Storytelling for the Digital Generation: A Guide for Self-Publication with the Adobe® Digital Publishing Suite.
Authors: Mikaela Minihan
ID: openalex.W100155295
URL: https://dc.etsu.edu/honors/48

Despite educational reforms, the annual results from the National Assessment of
Educational Progress continue to indicate that the majority of American fourth-
graders struggle to master the crucial skill of reading. In the last decade, the
percentage of students who read at or above a proficient level hovers around 30
percent, which draws attention to the fact that the academic institutions may
not be fully to blame for the decline of reading competency (NAEP, 2011). The
real reason for the incompetency could be attributed to the amount of time that
children spend reading as average fourth-graders spend less than two hours a
week reading (Juster, Ono, & Stafford, 2004, p. 11). This Digital Generation
lives in a world full of distractions in which reading cannot compete. Although
the American educational system is stressing reading instruction, children are
not putting what they are learning into practice outside of school. Instead of
reading, children immerse themselves into the world of interactive digital media
and electronic devices. If children do not increase the time they spend reading,
their proficiency will not improve. To revive reading within the Digital
Generation, authors of children’s literature may need to reevaluate their role
in the literacy problem because their traditional print-form content appears to
be unsuccessful in reaching their young audience. To create reading material
that children are eager to read, authors need to produce content in a format
that will entice a response from the newest generation. One way children’s
authors can accomplish this is by publishing transmedia storytelling ecosystems.
By combining storytelling with digital media to meet the modern literary needs
of today's children reading proficiency should begin to improve, along with a
renewed interest in literature. This research provides insight into today’s
“digital children” and suggests a methodology for creating transmedia literature
using the Adobe® Digital Publishing Suite.
