Title: Critical Challenges Of The South African School System
Authors: Nelda Mouton, G.P. Louw, G.L. Strydom
ID: openalex.W2103816806
URL: https://doi.org/10.19030/iber.v12i1.7510

The emphasis in the new curriculum after 1996 in South Africa was placed on the
transition from the traditional aims and objectives approach to Outcomes-based
education (OBE) and Curriculum 2005. This paradigm shift was interpreted as a
prerequisite for achievement of the vision of an internationally competitive
country. When analysing the school system in South Africa it became clear that
the education system was flawed, with poorly performing teachers, poor work
ethics, lack of community and parental support, poor control by education
authorities, poor support for teachers and very low levels of accountability.
These factors further spilled over into the morale of learners and could be seen
in the lack of discipline, brutal violence in schools, low moral values,
truancy, absenteeism, late coming and high dropout rates from Grade 1 to Grade
12 and very poor performance in essential areas such as Mathematics and
Literacy. Citizens in historically disadvantaged areas tend to become victims of
poverty, gangs and drug abuse. These factors further blend with the evil of
politics in South African schools which are furthermore plagued by various forms
of corruption and socio-economic challenges. Eighteen years after the end of the
apartheid dispensation, apartheid is still blamed by many for any real or
imagined ills in society, but the reality is that there is no political will to
enforce the law or to meet public expectations of accountability, efficiency and
delivery. In the light hereof, recommendations are proposed that will address
these challenges. The critical message of this article will convey that the fact
of the matter is that learner enrolment is not the same as attendance and
attendance does not imply learning. Therefore, teaching in South Africa must
become a profession of preference and pride as opposed to the present very
lackadaisical attitude.
