Title: Landscape for Children to Play and Learn: A Conceptual Comparison Between Natural Stream and Playground
Authors: Ismail Said, Mohd. Sarofil Abu Bakar
ID: openalex.W2157042182
URL: https://doi.org/10.11113/jt.v42.737

Bermain dan bergerak adalah asas kehidupan kanak–kanak. Bermain dengan elemen
landskap semula jadi dan buatan membangunkan kemahiran kognitif, fizikal dan
sosial kanak–kanak. Pada persepsi kanak–kanak, semua elemen fizikal dan
kuasa iklim di dalam alam lingkungan berupaya merangsang deria mereka. Hanya
dengan bermain, kemanfaatan atau keburukan elemen atau kuasa tersebut dapat
difahami. Kanak–kanak memahami landskap sebagai alam lingkungan secara tiga
cara: kognitif, afektif, dan penilaian. Apabila seorang kanak–kanak bergerak,
deria mereka dirangsang secara langsung lantas mereka mendapat feedback dan
affordances. Dua set landskap yang berbeza iaitu sungai dan taman permainan
dianalisa untuk menghuraikan perbezaan dan persamaan ransangan, ‘feedback’
dan ‘affordances’. Penghuraian ini jelas menyatakan bahawa landskap adalah
satu entiti ekologi yang dinamik. Pengalaman secara terus dengan landskap
menghasilkan pembangunan kognitif, fizikal dan sosial kanak-kanak. Adalah wajar
bagi kita meneliti kesan rangsangan, ‘feedback’ dan ‘affordances’
apabila mereka bentuk landskap untuk kanak–kanak untuk pembangunan kemahiran
kognitif, fizikal dan sosial mereka. Kata kunci: Kanak-kanak, landskap semula
jadi, taman permainan, kognitif, bermain, affordances Playing and moving are the
central of young children’s lives. Allowing the children to experience the
natural and man–made elements in their living environment would generate
cognitive, physical, and social skills development. To them natural forces such
as rain and wind, natural features such as vegetation, animals and landform, and
man–made elements such as buildings and road are ubiquitous elements in their
living environment. By playing with those elements, they learn to perceive their
benefits or adversities. Mobility and perception in the landscape stimulate the
children’s senses and generate feedbacks as well as affordances. Through
movement, the children perceive the landscape through three modes of learning
which are cognitive, affective, and evaluative. Two contrasting landscape
settings, a stream and a playground, are compared to explain the similarities
and differences of stimulations, feedbacks, and affordances, and the modes of
learning. The landscape is described as an ecological dynamic entity that
through direct experience would generate the cognitive, physical and social
developments of the children. In conclusion, it is important to design and
develop landscapes for children that stimulate their senses, provide feedbacks
and afford functional meanings to their cognitive, physical and social skills.
Key words: Children, natural landscape, playground, cognition, play, affordances
