Title: Object Relations Couple Therapy
Authors: Jill Savege Scharff, David E. Scharff
ID: openalex.W1757721222
URL: https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.psychotherapy.1997.51.2.141

The authors describe Fairbairn's view of the personality as a system of parts of
self and object in dynamic relation, formed in the context of dependent early
relationships and replayed in the intensely intimate and physical relationship
of marriage. Through Klein's concept of projective identification, a spouse
finds lost parts of the self in the partner, where they may flourish and be
reintegrated into the self or they may be held hostage. Marriage is an
opportunity for reworking the dynamic relation of parts of the self as they are
modified through mutual unconscious interaction with the spouse, but it may
become a closed system that inhibits growth of the individual partners. Object
relations couple therapy aims to breach the closed system of the unhappy
marriage, and offers an enlarged space for understanding that encourages the
spouses to provide a better holding environment for each other. Not directive,
didactic or symptom-focused, object relations therapy values affect, silence,
body language, fantasy, dreams, and transference phenomena as necessary for
reaching the unconscious in order to achieve insight. The object relations
therapist interprets defenses against anxieties that underlie repetitive
patterns of unhelpful behavior, and works toward understanding. As the clinical
vignettes show, therapists use countertransference to understand the couple's
shared transference from inside their experience. The engine of therapeutic
change in this model is the therapist's self. The process of therapy improves
the couple's capacity for containing each other's projections instead of
refusing to resonate with them or being overtaken by them to the detriment of
the self. A cycle of regression and progression in the couple's ability for
containment is found as therapy proceeds. The goal of therapy is to enable the
projective and introjective identificatory system of the marriage to function
with greater concern for the other and respect for the self.
