Title: Borders (En)Gendered: Normativities, Latinas, and a Latcrit Paradigm
Authors: Berta E. Hernández-Truyol
ID: openalex.W2222222724
URL: https://scholarship.law.ufl.edu/facultypub/835

This Essay, developed in a prologue and three parts, adopts Latinas'/os' world
traveling as a metaphor for Latina/o multidimensionality and as a springboard
for LatCrit theorizing. The Prologue is a brief diary entry of unfin de semana
viajando mundos - a weekend of actual traveling between New York and Miami; law
and familia; profesora and learner; colleague and hija; español and English;
norte y sur; normativa and other; indigenous and alien. This abbreviated record
of a Latina's life reveals, exposes, and unveils Latinas'/os' daily
crossdressing simply by virtue of their latinidad. This Prologue thus serves as
a concrete backdrop for the analytical, political, and theoretical points
addressed in the remaining parts of this Essay which explores two sets of
relationships vis-a-vis their significance to and impact on the development of
LatCrit theory. Part I uses narrative to compare and contrast NLW and Latina/o
normativities of race, ethnicity, nationhood, and language. It exposes the race,
color, ethnicity, gender, nationality, culture, and language fronteras
Latinas/os must cross-the "othering" we experience-while traversing the world as
defined by the dominant culture. This comparing and contrasting of Latina/o and
"American" normativities in Part I defines the need for a LatCrit theoretical
model that does not subordinate the Latina/o experience. In Part II this Essay
exposes how Latinas' assorted deviations from the normative male prototype,
combined with gendered Latino norms, including the gendered nature of the
Spanish language adding to these internal boundaries and confines, multiplies
their fronteras and complicates their journeys. The borderlands created for
Latinas by the overlapping gender biases of the external American and internal
Latino normativities, exacerbated by gendered cultural norms, underscore the
need for the development of teortas that specifically will recognize, embrace,
and espouse Latinas' identities, interests, and issues. LatCrit is a teoria that
can address the concerns of Latinas in light of both our internal and external
relationships in and with the worlds that have marginalized us. Finally, in Part
III this Essay proposes a LatCrit theoretical model that uses Latina/o
panethnicity, representative of race, gender, nationality, color, language,
ethnicity, and cultural diversity, to stimulate and inspire the construction of
a LatCrit matrix that places multidimensionality at the center of paradigm
formation by plaiting a multicultural, multilingual, multiethnic fabric into its
philosophy, construction, and logic. This model is important because it will
recognize the multidimensionality of Latinas/os and the particular position of
Latinas' dual relationship with the internal comunidad Latina and the external
American culture in developing a discourse which incorporates our realities and
identities.
