Title: “Dark Strangers” in Our Midst: Discourses of Race and Nation in Britain, 1947–1963
Authors: Chris Waters
ID: openalex.W2042483520
URL: https://doi.org/10.1086/386134

It has been more than a decade since Benedict Anderson urged us to consider the
nation a particular kind of cultural artefact and to study national communities
in terms of the style in which they are imagined. Anticipating Anderson's
seminal work, Enoch Powell, the Biblical scholar, Ulster Unionist M.P., and
1960s advocate of the voluntary repatriation of people of color in Britain
likewise suggested that the “life of nations … is lived largely in the
imagination.” He also noted that the myths on which Britain's “corporate
imagination” rested had, since 1945, become severely impoverished. Amidst the
rubble produced by the collapse of many of those myths scholars have begun to
problematize the various components of national identity that, customarily, have
been taken for granted as “real” rather than invented. They have also begun to
trace the manner by which the national community has constantly been imagined
and reimagined in the past. Some of their more insightful work has considered
the articulation of Englishness against other nationalities in the United
Kingdom, particularly the Irish. This had led Linda Colley to suggest that
national identity is always contingent and relational, the product of boundaries
drawn up to distinguish between the collective self and the other. In this
essay, I want to suggest that Britain's wartime sense of national unity,
generated through the struggle against fascist Germany, began to crumble after
1945. This gradual erosion of national cohesion, coupled with Britain's failure
to generate new narratives of national purpose through the rhetoric of the Cold
War, led to a veritable crisis of national self-representation in the 1950s, a
crisis compounded by domestic social dislocation and the rapid emergence of the
political, military, and economic hegemony of the United States.
