Title: Reinventing rapport : an investigation of the mother-daughter dyad within contemporary figure painting
Authors: ME Pridmore
ID: openalex.W121596981
URL: 

This project is a visual exploration of a subjective experience of female
sensuality within the context of contemporary debates about maternity, the
female body, beauty and pleasure in western art. It specifically examines these
ideas within the mother-daughter relationship (largely absent in western art) in
a domestic setting. The conceptual foundations of the project have been
developed through engagement with feminist theorists (Julia Kristeva and Luce
Iragaray), feminist revision of art history (Linda Nochlin and Griselda Pollock)
and personal experience, running parallel with a disciplined studio practice.
Employing a sequential narrative, the paintings aim to create a contemporary
body of work celebrating the mother-daughter dyad situated within discourses
about feminine jouissance and play. The research is informed by art practices
from the Renaissance (Giovanni Bellini), from the seventeenth century (Jan
Vermeer), from early Modernism (Gustave Courbet, Mary Cassatt, Edouard Vuillard,
Suzanne Valadon), and contemporary artists (Emily Kame Kngwarreye and Gerhardt
Richter). It seeks to discover possible new ways of representing the female
body, specifically the maternal body in relation to the developing girl-child,
so as to express a personal and positive idea of pleasure in the female body and
its decoration using the tropes of the feminine. The powerhouse of the project
was a search to find a balance between feminism and a diverse and rich maternal
heritage. In painting the female figure, the project attempts to create
transgressive works which simultaneously honour feminism's core value, the
empowering of women, but resist high Modernism's masculine, minimalist, hard-
edged exclusion of pattern and a 'decorative' feminine aesthetic. Within the
economy of my paintings the maternal body disappears, to become represented
symbolically by colour and pattern, celebrating the significance of textural
elements - clothing, furnishing fabrics, bedspreads, carpets, wall papers;
objects and styles of decoration chosen by the women who created the homes of my
childhood and adolescence. The project seeks to create images of the sensuality
of the female body from both a feminine and feminist perspective, acknowledging
female pleasure in looking at the female body, distinct from a voyeuristic male
desire concerned with conquest or domination. The thesis exhibition is comprised
of four series, which follow the daughter's development from the post-infant
stage (where the separation of mother and child has recently begun) through to
the pre-pubescent stage. Initiated into the rituals of femininity, the daughter
gains cache in the world and the promise of sensual pleasure, beyond puberty.
The independent gaze of the mother, and her absence in the final series, is an
important signal of her psychological independence. In the case of the child,
states of absorption or quiet activity, indicate 'flow' without passivity. Both
figures are contained within their own interior worlds. If the works create an
undercurrent of discomfort in the viewer, an unease at their proximity to this
particular quasi-erotic intimacy, this is to be desired.
