Title: Remaining Karen : A Study of Cultural Reproduction and the Maintenance of Identity
Authors: Ananda Rajah
ID: openalex.W1611068363
URL: https://doi.org/10.26530/oapen_459492

There are an estimated 242,000 Karen in Thailand making them the largest ethnic
minority in the country second only to the Chinese. In Burma, they number
approximately 2.2 million. The Karen, of whom the Sgaw and Pwo represent the two
largest groups based on dialectal differences, speak a number of related
languages which are now recognised as belonging to the Sino-Tibetan group of
languages. Since the early part of the last century, the Karen have been the
subject of a number of studies by missionaries and British colonial
administrators in Burma and, more recently, by anthropologists in Thailand. Two
major areas of interest in the long history of Karen studies have been the
nature of Karen religious systems which appear to draw on various traditions,
and the nature of Karen identity which appears remarkably resistant to change.
While Karen religious traditions and customs were a dominant concern in earlier
studies, the question of Karen ethnic identity (or identities) has been the
focus of interest in contemporary studies, matched perhaps only by an interest
in Karen subsistence or economic systems. Though the more recent anthropological
studies of the Karen have retained an interest in Karen religious systems,
related in most part to the study of Karen ethnicity, it is remarkable that
there has not been a detailed contemporary account of the indigenous, non-
Buddhist, non-Christian religion of the Karen. This study is concerned with both
issues -- the nature of indigenous Karen religion and the maintenance of
identity in a small Karen community which is firmly located, as much by
necessity as by choice, in a predominantly Northern Thai socio-economic milieu
in the highlands of Northern Thailand. It is also concerned with sociological
explanation as well as anthropological description, in the case of the Karen,
namely the part played by an indigenous religion (which draws little from
Buddhism or Christianity, both of which have had considerable influence on Karen
elsewhere) in the maintenance of identity. At one level, therefore, this study
may be regarded as an attempt to fill a gap in the contemporary ethnography of
the Karen, that is, to provide an account of an indigenous Karen religious
system as a system in its own right but taken broadly to show how it encompasses
different facets of life in one Karen community. At another level, this study
addresses a larger sociological issue in the study of the Karen: how a cultural
identity may be constituted (and reconstituted as an on-going process) and the
implications that this may have for an understanding of Karen ethnicity the
principles of which, though perhaps sufficiently established as a matter of
conventional sociological wisdom, have not been adequately demonstrated in
relation to hard ethnographic fact. The major argument in this thesis, stated in
its most general terms, is that religion and ritual sustain and reproduce what
is best regarded as a cultural ideology which provides a cultural identity, and
from which an ethnic identity may be constructed according to the particular
circumstances and details of the contexts of intergroup relations. In the case
of the Sgaw Karen of Palokhi, in Chiang Mai in Northern Thailand, who are the
subject of this study, it is argued that this cultural ideology consists of the
structured relations between what is best described as a "procreative model" of
society and social processes, an integral part of which is a system of social
classification based on the difference between male and female, cultural
definitions of the relations between the two and the relationship between men
and land, and a "model" of agricultural processes. The cultural ideology of the
Palokhi Karen is "reproduced" in and through their religious system and ritual
life, which is dominated by men who play a crucial role, and it is this which
provides them with their distinctive cultural identity.
