Title: Socioenvironmental conditions and nutritional status in urban and rural schoolchildren
Authors: Evelia Edith Oyhenart, Luis Eduardo Castro, Luis M. Forte, María L. Sicre, Fabián Aníbal Quintero
ID: openalex.W2068463108
URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/ajhb.20738

Abstract We analyzed the nutritional status of urban and rural schoolchildren
from Mendoza (Argentina), but avoided rural and urban categorization by
generating subpopulations as a function of their socioenvironmental
characteristics. We transformed weight and height data into z ‐scores using the
CDC/NCHS growth charts; defined underweight, stunting, and wasting by z ‐scores
of less than −2 SD; and calculated overweight and obesity, according to the
cutoff proposed by the International Obesity Task Force. Socioenvironmental
characteristics included housing, public services, parental resources, and
farming practices; we processed these variables by categorical
principal‐component analysis. The two first axes defined four subgroups of
schoolchildren: three of these were associated with urban characteristics, while
the remaining subgroup was considered rural. Nutritional status differed across
groups, whereas overweight was similar among the groups and obesity higher in
urban middle‐income children. Urban differences were manifested mainly as
underweight, but rural children exhibited the greatest stunting and wasting.
Thus, the negative effects of environment on nutritional status in children are
not restricted to poor periurban and rural areas, though these are indeed
unfavorable environments for growth: some urban families provide children with
sufficient quantity and diversity of foods to expose them to obesity. By
contrast, the more affluent urban families would appear to have greater
possibilities for allowing their children to adopt a healthy life‐style.
Although the causes of differences in nutritional status between middle‐ and
high‐income urban groups are not clear, these determinants probably involve
economic as well as educational influences. Am. J. Hum. Biol., 2008. © 2008
Wiley‐Liss, Inc.
