Title: A Legal Education Renaissance: A Practical Approach for the Twenty-First Century
Authors: John O. Sonsteng
ID: openalex.W2113386944
URL: https://open.mitchellhamline.edu/wmlr/vol34/iss1/7

This article presents the history of legal education, criticisms, research,
learning theory and innovative educational models in one place. They are
interrelated and provide the basis for realistic solutions to the problems
facing legal education, a legal education renaissance. PART I - THE HISTORY AND
STATUS OF LEGAL EDUCATION Chapter 1 - Thinking Outside the Box and Richard
Fosbury Addresses the short-comings of legal education and the reasons why
change is necessary. Law schools have the responsibility to teach and train
students to become competent lawyers. Chapter 2 - A Brief History of Legal
Education in the United States Provides facts that demonstrate legal education
in its present day form is obsolete. Chapter 3 - Roadblocks to Innovation
Provides an analysis of the roadblocks that stifle progress and prevent
innovation in legal education. Chapter 4 - Research and Recommendations Provides
a comprehensive guide to the research on legal education: The Reed Report, the
Cramton Report, the MacCrate Report, the Zemans and Rosenblum Survey, the Garth
and Martin Survey, the Minnesota Survey, the Binder and Bergman Survey, the
Sheldon and Krieger Research, and the 2007 Report of the Carnegie Foundation for
the Advancement of Teaching. Chapter 5 - Learning Theory, Instruction,
Curriculum Design, and Assessment Provides an analysis of various learning
theories and why a single approach to legal education fails to address the
differences in how people learn. Chapter 6 - What Others are Doing Examines
innovative teaching methods from all areas and levels of education which add to
the traditional lecture-based education. PART II - A LEGAL EDUCATION RENAISSANCE
Chapter 7 - A Leal Education Renaissance Demonstrates how a Legal Education
Renaissance can be achieved. The perspectives and recommendations in this work
are presented with the intent of encouraging discussion about the future of
modern legal education. It suggests a model for change, incorporates modern
learning theory and teaching tools and provides answers to criticism by
addressing curriculum, teaching, faculty, and costs. By offering a realistic,
achievable solution that fits within the guidelines and rules that govern legal
education institutions, it is not only possible, but essential to create a Legal
Education Renaissance.
