Title: Factors that influence breastfeeding initiation and duration in urban, suburban and rural areas of Zhejiang Province, Peoples Republic of China
Authors: Liqian Qiu
ID: openalex.W2415425272
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/20.500.11937/1242

Introduction: Breast milk is the best way to feed all infants. It results in
better nutrition for the infant and to reduced rates of chronic disease later in
childhood and adulthood. Breastfed babies have lower rates of infectious
diseases and will not be exposed to contaminated infant formula, such as the
recent experience with melamine in China. The WHO Expert Consultation on Infant
Feeding recommended exclusive breastfeeding for six months, with the
introduction of complementary foods and continued breastfeeding thereafter. It
was also recommended by the WHO that breastfeeding continue beyond six months
for up to two years and beyond. Breastmilk can provide the majority of nutrients
for the first 12 months of life. Complementary foods were given in the second
half year gradually.However with the rapid economic development, the traditional
home based obstetric system in China has changed. Following the change in
women’s living styles, traditional infant feeding perceptions and practices have
changed. Women now have high rates of returning to work after delivering a baby,
especially in the urban areas, and more infants are being given infant formula
and other substitutes for breastfeeding. Zhejiang Province is the one of fastest
developing economic regions located in the mid Eastern coast of China. The
breastfeeding rate has dropped rapidly since the 1970’s. This has significant
implications for the child health in this region. A longitudinal study of
breastfeeding was needed to provide the data necessary to implement a
comprehensive health promotion program. Efforts are needed to promote
breastfeeding, which should be one of the highest health promotion
priorities.The aim of this study was to document the prevalence and duration of
breastfeeding and exclusive breastfeeding in city, suburban and rural areas in
Zhejiang Province; analyze the factors determining the initiation and the
duration of breastfeeding; document mothers’ knowledge about the benefits of
breastfeeding; identify the prevalence of problems associated with breastfeeding
and constraints to exclusive breastfeeding up to six months of life; document
the prevalence of prelacteal feeds and finally to describe differences in
breastfeeding between city, suburb and rural area.Method: In order to achieve
these objectives a longitudinal cohort study was undertaken of infant feeding
practices in three locations in Zhejiang Province which represent city and
suburban and rural areas. Mothers who delivered babies during 2004 and 2005 were
randomly selected from the obstetric wards while in hospital and invited to
voluntarily participate in the study. The mothers were interviewed in hospital
and after discharge, were contacted by telephone three more times at 1, 3 and 6
months. The few mothers who could not be reached by telephone were interviewed
during the scheduled routine immunisation clinics at their local MCH clinic. On
each of these follow up occasions they were interviewed using a structured
questionnaire to obtain details of infant feeding practices. A total of 1520
mothers were recruited in 4 hospitals located in city, suburb and rural areas.
Almost all mothers (98%) agreed to participate. All data analyses were carried
out using the Statistical Package for Social Science (SPSS), release 14.0 (SPSS
Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Descriptive techniques and survival analysis were used
to document breastfeeding rates and duration. Cox regression analysis was
undertaken to explore factors affecting breastfeeding.Results: Of the total 1520
mothers were recruited into the study, 628 were from the city, 347 from the
suburb and 535 from the rural area. Breastfeeding initiation rates were high in
all three locations. Initially more than 95% of the mothers began breastfeeding,
but only 50.3% babies averagely in three locations were being exclusively
breastfed at discharge. The number of infants being exclusively breastfed prior
to discharge was relatively low. Exclusive breastfeeding before discharge was
positively related to delivery method, the first feed given to the baby,
mother’s place of residence, mother’s age, mothers’ education level and family
income.‘Any breastfeeding’ rates at discharge and at 1, 3 and 6 months were
96.9%, 96.0%, 89.7% and 76.7% respectively. ‘Exclusive breastfeeding’ rates at
discharge, and at 1, 3, 6 months were 50.3%, 55.1%, 45.8% and 3.9% respectively.
The average duration of ‘exclusive breastfeeding’ was 44.7 days (95% CI,
41.6-47.9).Overall about half of mothers gave the babies prelacteal feeds before
commencing breastfeeding. This situation was more common in city, compared with
the suburban and rural mothers. The prelacteal feeding rates were 62.0%, 36.6%
and 39.0% in city, suburb and rural area respectively.The breastfeeding rates
differed by location between the city, suburb and rural areas. ‘Any
breastfeeding’ rates in the city, suburb and rural area at discharge were 96.5
%, 96.8 % and 97.4 % respectively, the ‘exclusive breastfeeding’ rates in city,
suburb and rural area at discharge were 38.0%, 63.4 % and 61.0 % respectively.
The rates of exclusive breastfeeding at six months were only 0.2%, 0.5 % and 7.2
% respectively, well below the Chinese and WHO targets.The risk factors related
to cessation of ‘any breastfeeding’ were ‘mother’s age’, ‘the time the decision
to breastfeed was made’, ‘whether the infant was admitted to special care
nursery’, ‘mother’s return to work within 6 months’, ‘the early feeding of water
and /or other complementary foods, and location of mother’s usual residence.
Factors negatively associated with ‘exclusive breastfeeding’ duration were early
return to work and to place of residence, with the mothers living in the rural
area exclusively breastfeeding for longer.Delivery method was an important
influence on breastfeeding. In this study the highest caesarean section rate was
in the city (76%), with a similar rate in the suburbs (74%) and the lowest in
the rural area (53%). Mothers who had a caesarean section were less likely to be
exclusively breastfeeding on discharge (35.8% in city, 59.6% in the suburbs)
compared to vaginal delivery where the rates were 45% and 74.4% respectively.
The adjusted odds ratio for exclusive breastfeeding in caesarean section
deliveries in the city and suburban mothers was 0.64 (95% CI 0.46,
0.88).Conclusion: The study has descried the initiation and duration of
breastfeeding (to six months) of babies in the different areas of Zhejiang
Province. Separate information is provided on the prevalence of ‘any
breastfeeding’ and ‘exclusive breastfeeding'. The factors that are associated
with the initiation and duration of breastfeeding in Zhejiang Province are
documented. Health promotion programs are needed to change some traditional
inappropriate breastfeeding perceptions and to promote ‘exclusive breastfeeding’
in the first six months of life in Zhejiang. Education should be given and
regulations should be introduced restricting hospital staff from recommending
prelacteal and supplementary feeds unless warranted for medical reasons. The
research also shows that there would be a benefit to breastfeeding if delivery
and lactation leave were extended to six months and if the incidence of
caesarean section could be reduced to levels more consistent with WHO expected
levels.
