Title: New Understanding of "Relevant " Keyboard Pedagogy in Tertiary Institutions
Authors: Gemma Marian Carey
ID: openalex.W1510735517
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10072/38442

In current times, issues of curriculum relevance are driving a raft of reforms
and reviews in higher education. The unmet needs of students in terms of
employment outcomes, particularly in the area of the performing arts are
increasingly a matter of concern. For tertiary music training institutions, the
need to attach greater importance to student needs has forced a more critical
reappraisal of curriculum priorities. An effect of this has been ongoing
contestation and debate within music institutions about the nature and purposes
of music curriculum as a university offering.        This thesis examines the
implications of the above by undertaking an investigation into the relevance of
keyboard curriculum, as it is currently understood in one tertiary institution,
a Conservatorium of Music. It examines the contestation over student needs that
is apparent within the curriculum of keyboard within such an institution. The
aim is to improve the institution's capacity to respond appropriately to
'student needs' by better understanding issues about curriculum relevance. This
is done by investigating how needs become articulated within this particular
institution and curriculum domain and by investigating the effect these needs
articulations have on the practices of those who teach and those who learn
within this domain.         The study uses the conceptual work of Nancy Fraser
(1989) and Elizabeth Ellsworth (1989) and a doctoral study by Erica McWilliam
(1992), to focus on needs articulations or needs talk that is related to the
needs of keyboard students within this Conservatorium. This talk, which is
generated in management, staff and student texts, is examined as produced out of
systems of language use that are employed within and outside the Conservatorium.
The analysis of the talk treats the contestations and struggle over student
needs in the Conservatorium as products of, and productive of, power relations.
The analysis reveals discourse communities that are not only fractured from
within but which share very little common language. It demonstrates how systems
of language use at work within the Conservatorium marginalise students at the
same time as they permit the institution to continue its traditional work and
practice. The study clearly demonstrates how the institution itself is actively
producing 'failing' and 'blaming' students as discursive subjects. The
conclusion is drawn that more attention needs to be paid to building shared
communities that share a common discourse, rather than trying to wedge more
'relevant' material into the curriculum.
