Title: International Journal of Role-playing 1: Full Issue
Authors: Anders Drachen, Michael Hitchens, Markus Montola, Erik Champion, Jason Pittman
ID: openalex.W4376860187
URL: https://doi.org/10.33063/ijrp.vi1.176

Full Issue 1 of the IJRP.Table of Contents "Editorial," Anders Drachen The
International Journal of Role-Playing is a response to a growing need for a
place where the varied and wonderful fields of role-playing research and
development, covering academia, the industry and the arts, can exchange
knowledge and research, form networks and communicate."The Many Faces of Role-
Playing Games," Michael Hitchens and Anders Drachen By examining a range of
role-playing games some common features of them emerge. This results in a
definition that is more successful then previous ones at identifying both what
is, and what is not, a role-playing game. "The Invisible Rules of Role-Playing:
The Social Framework of Role-Playing Process," Markus Montola This paper looks
at the process of role-playing that takes place in various games. Role-play is a
social activity, where three elements are always present: An imaginary game
world, a power structure and personified player characters. "Roles and Worlds in
the Hybrid RPG Game of Oblivion," Erik Champion Single player games are now
powerful enough to convey the impression of shared worlds with social presence
and social agency. This paper explores a framework for defining virtual worlds.
"Seeking Fulfillment: Comparing Role-Play In Table-top Gaming and World of
Warcraft," Jason Pittman and Christopher Paul Through ethnographic research and
a survey of World of Warcraft (WoW) players, this study assess the relative
fulfillment and frequency of online and offline role-playing for WoW players. "A
Hermeneutical Approach to Role-Playing Analysis," J. Tuomas Harviainen This is
an article about viewing role-playing games and role-playing game theory from a
hermeneutical standpoint. In other words, it presents one view on how a role-
playing situation can be seen as a set of texts.
