Title: A promising community-based hip-hop dance intervention for the promotion of psychosocial and physical well-being among youth living in a disadvantaged neighbourhood
Authors: Julie Beaulac
ID: openalex.W582390724
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10393/29606

Young people from low socio-economic, minority, and other disadvantaged groups
tend to be less physically active and to have poorer health. With this in mind,
a community-academic partnership was formed to respond to the need for more
physical activity programming targeting disadvantaged young people. The purpose
of this thesis was to investigate the implementation and perceived impact of a
new hip-hop dance program on the psychological, social, and physical well-being
of youth aged 11 to 16 years living in a multicultural, disadvantaged community
in Ottawa. In total, two studies were conducted. The first paper responds to the
first project objective, which sought to better understand the needs, barriers,
and facilitators to youth participation in physical activity in order to
conceptualize the new program. Three focus groups were conducted with young
people and parents from the target community. Findings suggested a need for more
physical activity programming that was safe, accessible, age-appropriate, and
culturally relevant. Hip-hop dance was reported as an appealing program option
and thus, girls-only and co-ed formats of the program were implemented across
two separate 3-month sessions, with funding from United Way Ottawa. The second
and third objectives related to the evaluation of the new program, which
involved a non-experimental pretest-posttest design from the perspective of the
youth participant, parent, and program staff. Mixed methods were used, including
document review, interview, focus group, observation, and questionnaire format.
The second paper reviews the implementation of this new program. Overall, the
consistency and quality of program implementation were moderately satisfactory;
however, important concerns were noted, and the findings suggested that this
program was only partially delivered as planned. Finally, the third paper
reviews the success of the program. Quantitatively, there was a significant
improvement in perceived hip-hop dance skills. The qualitative findings were
more promising, showing positive perceived impacts across eight areas of well-
being. Overall, the findings suggested that this intervention is a promising and
relevant program for the promotion of youth psychological, social, and physical
well-being, particularly if implementation concerns are addressed. Implications
for the promotion of physical activity among this population and future research
are reviewed.
