Title: Being Young in Old Town: Youth Subjectivities and Associational Life in Bamenda
Authors: Jude Thaddeus Dingbobga Fokwang
ID: openalex.W316559244
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/1807/11203

This study explores the ways in which young people in the neighbourhood of Old
Town in Bamenda negotiate the predicament of blocked opportunities and ‘arrested
adulthood’ occasioned by the decline in the nation-building project and
prolonged socio-economic and moral crisis in Cameroon. I investigate how urban
youth in Old Town construct their moral and socio-cultural worlds through
involvement in associations. The main finding suggests that faced with growing
uncertainty, young people in Bamenda are positioning themselves as important
social actors by drawing on local cultural resources such as associations to
construct their social worlds that aim to circumvent their exclusion and
marginality. In this light, I analyse youth associations as central although not
exclusive to negotiating young people’s predicament by focusing on a range of
practices through which they seek respectability and claim social adult status.
Drawing on the concepts of transition, subjectivities and personhood, I show
that young people straddle the worlds of ‘youth’ and social adulthood, statuses
that are not only cultural constructions but also the products of differential
power relations and social positioning. I contend that the processes of
positioning and the production of personhood are largely experienced through
involvement in associational life. The study focuses on three associations,
namely the Chosen Sisters, the United Sisters and the Ntambag Brothers
Association (NBA). Organised on the basis of seniority and gender, I argue that
these associations, while negotiating claims to adult status for their members,
tend to challenge state-centric notions of citizenship as they simultaneously
position themselves as moral actors upon whom society can count on for
regeneration. Through a range of social projects, pursued on behalf of and
sanctioned by the community, young people in Old Town reaffirm the centrality of
interdependence and the situated understanding of social adulthood predicated on
the redistribution of one’s success or achievement. This study points to the re-
emergent role of associations in negotiating everyday life in the face of
crisis. It is a significant contribution towards understanding voluntary and
communal associations in general and young people’s modes of transitions into
social adulthood.
