Title: The Teacher's Homecoming: Understanding Vocational Identity Development of Military Career Changers
Authors: Kimberly Kay Fleming
ID: openalex.W113477568
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/1903/8814

As increasing numbers of teacher candidates enter the field of education from
other careers, teacher educators must consider the complexities of career
transition. Insiders' accounts of vocational change can help teacher educators
act with tact and authenticity in a way that is sensitive to the experiences of
career changers. This study uses philosophical hermeneutics to develop
understanding related to the sociocultural process of vocational identity
development for two military career changers as they become teachers. The
concept of identity is explored, and it is developed both as lived experience in
community as well as a sense of self, fashioned through rememberings and
imaginings. Two case studies center on Caucasian males with military experience
who are transitioning into secondary English teaching positions. Thomas, a
50-year-old Air Force retiree with 24 years of service, is enrolled in a local
school system-sponsored alternative preparation program. Rob, a 38-year-old past
Verizon employee and current lieutenant in the Army Reserves, is enrolled in a
Master of Arts in Teaching program. This study employs a participatory paradigm
in which participants serve as co-researchers. The study follows each co-
researcher into three communities of practice related to their teacher
preparation and/or induction to teaching. Their experiences as persons-in-
community are analyzed using a sociocultural perspective. The following
constructs are explicated for each community of practice under study: place,
social structures, practical tools, conceptual tools, metaphors, narratives, and
imagined futures. Each community is shown to promote certain teaching identities
while constraining others, although the process of vocational identity
development emerges as a negotiation among person and community. In the spirit
of Wenger (1998), each individual's nexus of being is then discussed, and
vocational identity is explored in relation to coordination and contradiction of
multiple communities as well as in mutual constitution with an individual's
rememberings and imaginings. A vocational meta-story is told in archetypal
language to represent the reverse coming of age which military career changers
undergo on their journeys to become and belong as teachers. Finally, a synthesis
of understandings related to identity, ways to make meaning, and the needs of
military career changers is offered.
