Title: No Boy Left Behind? Single-Sex Education and the Essentialist Myth of Masculinity
Authors: David S. Cohen
ID: openalex.W1591138265
URL: https://www.repository.law.indiana.edu/ilj/vol84/iss1/3

In late 2006, the Department of Education changed the Title IX regulations to
broaden the permissibility of single-sex education in primary and secondary
schools. The changes took place in the context of a growing concern over the
performance and well-being of boys in American schools. This article describes,
dissects, and critically analyzes the narrative about boys, masculinity, and
single-sex education that surrounded these changes.The public narrative about
the need for single-sex education focused, in substantial part, on what I call
the essentialist myth of masculinity. This article catalogs the important
components of this myth: heteronormativity, aggression, activity, sports-
obsession, competitiveness, stoicism, and not being girls. The article then
shows, using education and gender theory, that this conception of masculinity is
harmful to both girls and boys. Instead of pushing this form of masculinity, the
law and schools should make room for multiple and varied masculinities for boys
(and girls).The article argues that the Title IX regulatory change that allows
for the expansion of single-sex schooling can actually work to further empower
and entrench the essentialist myth of masculinity, thus violating its own
prohibition on sex stereotyping. By adopting strong interpretations of already-
existing jurisprudence about gender stereotyping from both constitutional law
and Title IX, the article shows how de-essentializing masculinity is possible
and preferable in the law. The article concludes that schools that implement
single-sex education must do so for reasons other than promoting an
essentialized notion of masculinity and that the law must be vigilant in
ensuring that schools' implementation not further reify dominant conceptions of
what it means to be a boy.
