Title: Increasing Sleep Duration for a Healthier (and Less Obese?) Population Tomorrow
Authors: Terry Young
ID: openalex.W1894883149
URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/sleep/31.5.593

EVER-INCREASING REPORTS LINKING SHORT SLEEP DURATION WITH INCREASED OBESITY HAVE
PROMPTED HEATED DEBATES, EDITORIALS, AND MANY NEWS reports. With the current
demand for rapid “bench to bedside” translation of research findings, the short
sleep-obesity link has been widely disseminated already. The general public,
health providers, and policy makers have practical questions: Does sleeping too
little make you fat? Can you lose weight by sleeping longer? After nearly 700
studies, what answers can the field of sleep research offer?    Cappuccio and
colleagues1 have done the heavy lifting for us by gleaning the literature and
abstracting data on 634,511 participants from 30 studies. The aims of their
report, in this issue of Sleep, were to assess whether evidence solidly supports
an association of short sleep duration and obesity, and to quantify the
association using pooled data. The meta-analysis results, using dichotomous
variables for sleep duration and obesity, show that compared with children
sleeping >10 hours, those sleeping 10 or fewer hours/night have 89% greater odds
of being obese (OR = 1.89, 95% CI = 1.47−2.43, P 5 hours have 55% greater odds
of being obese (OR = 1.55, 95% CI = 1.43−1.68, P < 0.0001). Regression analyses
with continuous variables using pooled data on adults predicted that a
1-hour/night increase in sleep was associated with a decrease of 0.35 BMI units.
The authors concluded that there is consistent evidence for an increased risk of
obesity with short sleep duration, but that a causal link is unproven. More
prospective studies incorporating repeated measures of sleep duration and
rigorous control for confounders were recommended. The authors' answer to
questions about increasing sleep to lose weight would likely be “we do not know
yet.”    Also in this issue of Sleep is a letter from Horne expressing his
consternation that the sleep-obesity link, even if causal, has been overrated in
importance.2 In his letter, “Too weighty a link between short sleep and
obesity,” he touches on key points common to any risk factor reduction strategy.
Horne notes that the prevalence of the “exposure” is low (few people are short
sleepers), the effect size is small, and suggests other outcomes of short sleep
(e.g., accidents) are worse than a slight weight gain. My guess is that his
answer to the individual wondering if they can sleep away their obesity would be
“no.”    The comprehensive review article by Cappuccio and colleagues1 and the
letter to the editor by Horne2 underscore the tough issues in translating study
findings into action and provide an opportunity to step outside the clinical box
and consider determinants of population health. The leap from published findings
to policy has always been contentious, cheered on by advocates and delayed by
objective purists waiting for a better model fit.3 In addition to the soundness
of findings, other factors weigh in on whether or not policy change and
population initiatives are warranted, or if more research is needed. Let us
consider the feasibility of increasing sleep to decrease obesity from the
broader population perspective, for example, as seen by federal agencies
developing Healthy People 2020 (see www.healthypeople.gov)—a program to set
goals for improved population health with an emphasis on obesity in children—or
policy makers considering regulation of work schedules that curtail sleep
duration.    Central to the goal of assessing the benefit of risk factor
reduction is whether the factor has a causal role in the outcome. Cappuccio et
al1 conclude that a causal link has not been proven. But, can this ever really
be achieved? Causal inference in epidemiology—much simpler in the previous era
of infectious diseases with necessary and sufficient causes—has evolved into a
maze of argumentation, rooted in the history and philosophy of science, with no
bottom line.4 Earlier schemes and checklists for scientific inferences are
flawed in light of the complexity of biologic associations with gene-environment
interactions and an ever-changing socioeconomic context. Biomedical scientists,
described as “practitioners who use a variety of criteria to evaluate data in
conditions that provide less than total certainty” must deal with a gradient in
level of certainty for causality. And researchers have differed in where they
set the level for the sleep-obesity link, with some concluding that there is
sufficient evidence for causality and initiation of prevention strategies.5
With even a modest level of causal evidence, how compelling is the case for
increasing sleep duration as a strategy to decrease obesity? Overweight and
obesity are high on the list of predictors of poor health; diabetes, sleep
apnea, hypertension, and other significant disorders have been attributed to
excess weight.6 Although obesity is reversible, voluntary weight loss is
difficult to sustain. Thus, preventing some fraction of obesity prevalence would
be a great benefit to population health.    With reduction of obesity a worthy
goal, can “increased sleep” make enough of a difference? Horne2 is underwhelmed
with the magnitude of the sleep-obesity link. Questioning the importance of
small effect sizes is not uncommon. Reaction to findings that some risk factor
causes an elevation of 3–4 mm Hg in systolic blood pressure with P < 0.001,
often goes like this—“yes, it's statistically significant, but is it clinically
significant?” What is missing is the consideration of whether the effect is of
public health significance.    Geoffrey Rose, a British epidemiologist and
pioneer in prevention, clarified the distinction between “individual” and
“population” in interpreting effect sizes.7 Study findings from samples of
individuals are average values that express the mean of a target population;
Rose stressed the value of small shifts in those population means toward
healthier values. Consider the meta-analysis estimate1 that sleeping one extra
hour would lower the average BMI of adults by 0.35 units, equivalent to 1–3 kg
of weight depending on height. Clinically important on an individual level? No,
but definitely of public health significance. Rose and Day8 demonstrated with
data from 32 countries, collected in 1988, that a reduction of just 1 kg in the
mean weight of a typical European population (e.g., mean BMI = 25) was
equivalent to a decline in the prevalence of overweight from 6% to 4%: a
reduction of 33%. This benefit would be more dramatic in the US today, where the
BMI distribution has a mean of 28 and a disproportionately extended tail of
extreme obesity.    Prevalence of the risk factor is an important component in
extrapolating the impact of a particular effect size. Horne notes 5% to 8% of
adults are short sleepers, and expresses with various comparisons why he
believes that the reduction of obesity attributable to increasing sleep would be
trivial.2 Citing study findings of a 2-fold increased prevalence of obesity for
children sleeping 10 hours/night, he correctly pointed to the less impressive
results when expressed as absolute, rather than relative differences: 6% of
obese children were short sleepers compared to 3.6% of the non-obese. Stressing
that relatively few obese people are short sleepers and few short sleepers are
obese, he implies that overall little benefit in terms of obesity could be
gained by changing sleep duration. Recall, however, that not all smokers get
lung cancer, and lung cancer has causes other than smoking.    With a standard
formula,9 I calculated the population attributable risk for children and adults,
based on exposure prevalence from published data that 5% to 15% of children10
and 5% to 8% of adults are short sleepers2 and the pooled odds ratios1 (1.9 for
children and 1.6 for adults). The results indicate that 5% to 13% of the total
proportion of obesity in children and 3% to 5% in adults, could be attributable
to short sleep. A reduction of at least 5% of the population burden of obesity
would be of clear public health significance.    Enthusiasm for gambling on a
risk reduction strategy with only modest causal evidence should be tempered by
the cost-benefit ratio. The benefits of reducing short sleep extend far beyond a
reduction in obesity, as Horne pointed out,2 and costs are minimal: loss of an
hour or so of wake time among those spending 19 or more hours awake per day.
With public health in mind, need we delay attempts to increase sleep duration in
short sleepers as a population goal until we have more longitudinal data?
Undoubtedly, better studies will be conducted, effect sizes will be more
precise, and casual certainty will be fine-tuned. In the meantime, with 700
studies behind us and well summarized by Cappuccio and colleagues,1 certainty
that short sleep is not healthy, that short sleepers are more likely to be
obese, (with a good chance that short sleep is the culprit in a meaningful
number of children and adults), we do have enough to advocate for population-
targeted educational initiatives and policies to increase sleep duration as a
means of reducing obesity. No, I would not tell an individual that they can
sleep away their obesity, but, with a moderate degree of certainty, I expect
that if short sleepers increase their sleep time, the population as a whole will
be healthier and rank lower in mean BMI. In the words of one renown for his
logic, “the needs of the many outweigh the needs of the one” (Spock, Wrath of
Khan, 1982).
