Title: GREAT PROGRAMS IN ARCHITECTURE: RANKINGS, PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENTS, AND DIVERSE PATHS TO PROMINENCE
Authors: Ann Forsyth
ID: openalex.W2278804273
URL: https://doaj.org/article/fd06cee1b5b9414090dbdf7b24bd6e91

What makes a great program in architecture? This paper grapples with a key
dilemma faced by architecture programs seeking to be recognized on campus and
among their peers. How do schools position themselves to be perceived as
programs valued by their universities, faculties, and students, distinguished in
ways that represent important dimensions of architecture? The paper first
explains how success or performance is currently measured in various ranking and
assessment exercises: via reputational surveys; employer reviews; publication
and citation counts; complex assessment rankings; and multiple, uncombined
performance measures. It then outlines diverse paths or definitions of what it
means to be a top or prominent program: elite design; practical readiness;
technological sophistication; other substantive or pedagogical niches; and
research.\n\nThis paper argues there are multiple ways in which architecture can
be practiced and thus diverse paths to prominence but at present ranking schemes
reflect only a narrow range of practice. To take advantage of current rankings
schemes, or provide real alternatives, requires institutional activity, however.
Individual schools already promote their interests on their web sites and in
academic guidebooks but such self representations do not have the appeal to
students and university administrators that comparative rankings present.
Alternative assessments need to be created such as in the multiple performance
measure approach—an approach that allows comparisons among schools but on many
dimensions. Merely creating indicators of achievement does not create or improve
excellence, of course. However, such measures could provide students with better
information for selecting programs, help programs argue for both their worth and
their need for resources, and, most importantly, enlarge debates about
architectural excellence and the future of the profession.
