Title: Caregiver sensitivity, contingent social responsiveness, and secure infant attachment.
Authors: Carl J. Dunst, Danielle Z. Kassow
ID: openalex.W1964551316
URL: https://doi.org/10.1037/h0100409

A World Health Organization report (e.g., Richter, 2004) on importance of
caregiver-child relationships as a context for growth and development of young
children throughout world noted that: Sensitive and responsive caregiving is a
requirement for healthy neurophysiological, physical and psychological
development of a child. Sensitivity and responsiveness have been identified as
key features of caregiving behavior related to later positive health and
development outcomes in young children. (p. 1) One of developmental consequences
of sensitive and responsive caregiving is secure infant/adult attachment
(Bowlby, 1988). Secure attachment is generally understood to be an affectional
bond between an infant and an adult caregiver (1) that has two elements: (1)
infant seeking out attachment figure in times of distress and need and (2)
infant having ability and confidence to engage in activities separate from
attachment figure (Ainsworth, 1989). The development of attachment relationship
is recognized as one of most important aspects of human social and emotional
development (e.g., Lamb, Ketterlinus, & Fracasso, 1992). This is case, in part,
because secure attachment has been found to be related to enhanced cognitive,
social, and emotional development throughout childhood and early adolescence
(Bukatko & Daehler, 2001; Fagot & Kavanagh, 1993; Hazen & Durrett, 1982; Matas,
Arend, & Sroufe, 1978; Sroufe, Egeland, & Kreutzer, 1990). Many theories as well
as variations of theories have been posited for explaining sources and
consequences of secure infant attachment (see e.g., Cassidy & Shaver, 1999;
Egeland & Erickson, 1993). John Bowlby (1969) is credited with original
formulation of attachment theory, and Mary Ainsworth (Ainsworth & Wittig, 1969)
is credited with highlighting importance of caregiver sensitivity as a
determinant of secure attachment. Gewirtz and his colleagues proposed a
behavioral, or operant learning analysis, perspective of secure infant
attachment that considers caregiver sensitivity and responsiveness as having
reinforcement properties and infants' responses to caregivers' behavior as
having differential consequences on caregivers' reactions (e.g., Gewirtz, 1972a,
1991; Gewirtz & Boyd, 1977; Gewirtz & Pelaez-Nogueras, 1991). According to
Gewirtz, attachment is parsimoniously explained by fact that child behavior is
cued and reinforced by caregiver responses and may have either positive or
negative effects on child behavior that in turn is directed toward caregiver
(e.g., type of attachment). In Gewirtz's (1991) own words, the dyadic functional
relations between cue and reinforcing stimuli from attachment figure/object
person and child's responses they control that connote attachment of child to
attachment figure may occur in any segment of life from infancy onward (p. 250).
The purposes of this article are to summarize findings from: (a) two practice-
based research syntheses of relationships between caregiver sensitivity and
secure infant attachment (Kassow & Dunst, 2004, 2005) and (b) one practice-based
research synthesis of interventions for strengthening caregiver sensitivity to
child behavior (Dunst & Kassow, 2004). A practice-based research synthesis
involves review and integration of research evidence where focus of
investigation is same or similar environmental (intervention) characteristics
and how variations in characteristics are related to variations in consequences
of different events or experiences. These kinds of research syntheses differ
from more traditional research reviews and syntheses by disentangling and
unpacking what matters most in terms of explaining relationship(s) between
different environmental experiences and their consequences (Dunst, 2007; Dunst,
Trivette, & Cutspec, 2002). …
