Title: NeSyFOLD: Neurosymbolic Framework for Interpretable Image Classification
Authors: Parth Padalkar, Huaduo Wang, Gopal Gupta
ID: 2301.12667
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.12667

Abstract:
Deep learning models such as CNNs have surpassed human performance in computer
vision tasks such as image classification. However, despite their
sophistication, these models lack interpretability which can lead to biased
outcomes reflecting existing prejudices in the data. We aim to make predictions
made by a CNN interpretable. Hence, we present a novel framework called NeSyFOLD
to create a neurosymbolic (NeSy) model for image classification tasks. The model
is a CNN with all layers following the last convolutional layer replaced by a
stratified answer set program (ASP). A rule-based machine learning algorithm
called FOLD-SE-M is used to derive the stratified answer set program from
binarized filter activations of the last convolutional layer. The answer set
program can be viewed as a rule-set, wherein the truth value of each predicate
depends on the activation of the corresponding kernel in the CNN. The rule-set
serves as a global explanation for the model and is interpretable. A
justification for the predictions made by the NeSy model can be obtained using
an ASP interpreter. We also use our NeSyFOLD framework with a CNN that is
trained using a sparse kernel learning technique called Elite BackProp (EBP).
This leads to a significant reduction in rule-set size without compromising
accuracy or fidelity thus improving scalability of the NeSy model and
interpretability of its rule-set. Evaluation is done on datasets with varied
complexity and sizes. To make the rule-set more intuitive to understand, we
propose a novel algorithm for labelling each kernel's corresponding predicate in
the rule-set with the semantic concept(s) it learns. We evaluate the performance
of our "semantic labelling algorithm" to quantify the efficacy of the semantic
labelling for both the NeSy model and the NeSy-EBP model.
