Title: LunarNav: Crater-based Localization for Long-range Autonomous Lunar Rover
Navigation
Authors: Shreyansh Daftry, Zhanlin Chen, Yang Cheng, Scott Tepsuporn, Brian
Coltin, Ussama Naam, Lanssie Mingyue Ma, Shehryar Khattak, Matthew Deans, Larry
Matthies
ID: 2301.01350
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.01350

Abstract:
The Artemis program requires robotic and crewed lunar rovers for resource
prospecting and exploitation, construction and maintenance of facilities, and
human exploration. These rovers must support navigation for 10s of kilometers
(km) from base camps. A lunar science rover mission concept - Endurance-A, has
been recommended by the new Decadal Survey as the highest priority medium-class
mission of the Lunar Discovery and Exploration Program, and would be required to
traverse approximately 2000 km in the South Pole-Aitkin (SPA) Basin, with
individual drives of several kilometers between stops for downlink. These rover
mission scenarios require functionality that provides onboard, autonomous,
global position knowledge ( aka absolute localization). However, planetary
rovers have no onboard global localization capability to date; they have only
used relative localization, by integrating combinations of wheel odometry,
visual odometry, and inertial measurements during each drive to track position
relative to the start of each drive. In this work, we summarize recent
developments from the LunarNav project, where we have developed algorithms and
software to enable lunar rovers to estimate their global position and heading on
the Moon with a goal performance of position error less than 5 meters (m) and
heading error less than 3-degree, 3-sigma, in sunlit areas. This will be
achieved autonomously onboard by detecting craters in the vicinity of the rover
and matching them to a database of known craters mapped from orbit. The overall
technical framework consists of three main elements: 1) crater detection, 2)
crater matching, and 3) state estimation. In previous work, we developed crater
detection algorithms for three different sensing modalities. Our results suggest
that rover localization with an error less than 5 m is highly probable during
daytime operations.
