Title: Optimal lower bounds for Quantum Learning via Information Theory
Authors: Shima Bab Hadiashar, Ashwin Nayak, Pulkit Sinha
ID: 2301.02227
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.02227

Abstract:
Although a concept class may be learnt more efficiently using quantum samples as
compared with classical samples in certain scenarios, Arunachalam and de Wolf
(JMLR, 2018) proved that quantum learners are asymptotically no more efficient
than classical ones in the quantum PAC and Agnostic learning models. They
established lower bounds on sample complexity via quantum state identification
and Fourier analysis. In this paper, we derive optimal lower bounds for quantum
sample complexity in both the PAC and agnostic models via an information-
theoretic approach. The proofs are arguably simpler, and the same ideas can
potentially be used to derive optimal bounds for other problems in quantum
learning theory.
  We then turn to a quantum analogue of the Coupon Collector problem, a classic
problem from probability theory also of importance in the study of PAC learning.
Arunachalam, Belovs, Childs, Kothari, Rosmanis, and de Wolf (TQC, 2020)
characterized the quantum sample complexity of this problem up to constant
factors. First, we show that the information-theoretic approach mentioned above
provably does not yield the optimal lower bound. As a by-product, we get a
natural ensemble of pure states in arbitrarily high dimensions which are not
easily (simultaneously) distinguishable, while the ensemble has close to maximal
Holevo information. Second, we discover that the information-theoretic approach
yields an asymptotically optimal bound for an approximation variant of the
problem. Finally, we derive a sharper lower bound for the Quantum Coupon
Collector problem, via the generalized Holevo-Curlander bounds on the
distinguishability of an ensemble. All the aspects of the Quantum Coupon
Collector problem we study rest on properties of the spectrum of the associated
Gram matrix, which may be of independent interest.
