Title: World Models and Predictive Coding for Cognitive and Developmental
Robotics: Frontiers and Challenges
Authors: Tadahiro Taniguchi, Shingo Murata, Masahiro Suzuki, Dimitri Ognibene,
Pablo Lanillos, Emre Ugur, Lorenzo Jamone, Tomoaki Nakamura, Alejandra Ciria,
Bruno Lara, Giovanni Pezzulo
ID: 2301.05832
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.05832

Abstract:
Creating autonomous robots that can actively explore the environment, acquire
knowledge and learn skills continuously is the ultimate achievement envisioned
in cognitive and developmental robotics. Their learning processes should be
based on interactions with their physical and social world in the manner of
human learning and cognitive development. Based on this context, in this paper,
we focus on the two concepts of world models and predictive coding. Recently,
world models have attracted renewed attention as a topic of considerable
interest in artificial intelligence. Cognitive systems learn world models to
better predict future sensory observations and optimize their policies, i.e.,
controllers. Alternatively, in neuroscience, predictive coding proposes that the
brain continuously predicts its inputs and adapts to model its own dynamics and
control behavior in its environment. Both ideas may be considered as
underpinning the cognitive development of robots and humans capable of continual
or lifelong learning. Although many studies have been conducted on predictive
coding in cognitive robotics and neurorobotics, the relationship between world
model-based approaches in AI and predictive coding in robotics has rarely been
discussed. Therefore, in this paper, we clarify the definitions, relationships,
and status of current research on these topics, as well as missing pieces of
world models and predictive coding in conjunction with crucially related
concepts such as the free-energy principle and active inference in the context
of cognitive and developmental robotics. Furthermore, we outline the frontiers
and challenges involved in world models and predictive coding toward the further
integration of AI and robotics, as well as the creation of robots with real
cognitive and developmental capabilities in the future.
