Title: Explaining Quantum Circuits with Shapley Values: Towards Explainable
Quantum Machine Learning
Authors: Raoul Heese, Thore Gerlach, Sascha Mücke, Sabine Müller, Matthias
Jakobs, Nico Piatkowski
ID: 2301.09138
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.09138

Abstract:
Methods of artificial intelligence (AI) and especially machine learning (ML)
have been growing ever more complex, and at the same time have more and more
impact on people's lives. This leads to explainable AI (XAI) manifesting itself
as an important research field that helps humans to better comprehend ML
systems. In parallel, quantum machine learning (QML) is emerging with the
ongoing improvement of quantum computing hardware combined with its increasing
availability via cloud services. QML enables quantum-enhanced ML in which
quantum mechanics is exploited to facilitate ML tasks, typically in the form of
quantum-classical hybrid algorithms that combine quantum and classical
resources. Quantum gates constitute the building blocks of gate-based quantum
hardware and form circuits that can be used for quantum computations. For QML
applications, quantum circuits are typically parameterized and their parameters
are optimized classically such that a suitably defined objective function is
minimized. Inspired by XAI, we raise the question of the explainability of such
circuits by quantifying the importance of (groups of) gates for specific goals.
To this end, we apply the well-established concept of Shapley values. The
resulting attributions can be interpreted as explanations for why a specific
circuit works well for a given task, improving the understanding of how to
construct parameterized (or variational) quantum circuits, and fostering their
human interpretability in general. An experimental evaluation on simulators and
two superconducting quantum hardware devices demonstrates the benefits of the
proposed framework for classification, generative modeling, transpilation, and
optimization. Furthermore, our results shed some light on the role of specific
gates in popular QML approaches.
