Title: ShadowNav: Crater-Based Localization for Nighttime and Permanently
Shadowed Region Lunar Navigation
Authors: Abhishek Cauligi, R. Michael Swan, Masahiro Ono, Shreyansh Daftry, John
Elliott, Larry Matthies, Deegan Atha
ID: 2301.04630
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04630

Abstract:
There has been an increase in interest in missions that drive significantly
longer distances per day than what has currently been performed. Further, some
of these proposed missions require autonomous driving and absolute localization
in darkness. For example, the Endurance A mission proposes to drive 1200km of
its total traverse at night. The lack of natural light available during such
missions limits what can be used as visual landmarks and the range at which
landmarks can be observed. In order for planetary rovers to traverse long
ranges, onboard absolute localization is critical to the ability of the rover to
maintain its planned trajectory and avoid known hazardous regions. Currently, to
accomplish absolute localization, a ground in the loop (GITL) operation is
performed wherein a human operator matches local maps or images from onboard
with orbital images and maps. This GITL operation limits the distance that can
be driven in a day to a few hundred meters, which is the distance that the rover
can maintain acceptable localization error via relative methods. Previous work
has shown that using craters as landmarks is a promising approach for performing
absolute localization on the moon during the day. In this work we present a
method of absolute localization that utilizes craters as landmarks and matches
detected crater edges on the surface with known craters in orbital maps. We
focus on a localization method based on a perception system which has an
external illuminator and a stereo camera. We evaluate (1) both monocular and
stereo based surface crater edge detection techniques, (2) methods of scoring
the crater edge matches for optimal localization, and (3) localization
performance on simulated Lunar surface imagery at night. We demonstrate that
this technique shows promise for maintaining absolute localization error of less
than 10m required for most planetary rover missions.
