Title: YOLO-CL: Galaxy cluster detection in the SDSS with deep machine learning
Authors: Kirill Grishin, Simona Mei, Stéphane Ilic
ID: 2301.09657
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.09657

Abstract:
(Abridged) Galaxy clusters are a powerful probe of cosmological models. Next
generation large-scale optical and infrared surveys will reach unprecedented
depths over large areas and require highly complete and pure cluster catalogs,
with a well defined selection function. We have developed a new cluster
detection algorithm YOLO-CL, which is a modified version of the state-of-the-art
object detection deep convolutional network YOLO, optimized for the detection of
galaxy clusters. We trained YOLO-CL on color images of the redMaPPer cluster
detections in the SDSS. We find that YOLO-CL detects $95-98\%$ of the redMaPPer
clusters, with a purity of $95-98\%$ calculated by applying the network to SDSS
blank fields. When compared to the MCXC2021 X-ray catalog in the SDSS
footprint,YOLO-CL is more complete then redMaPPer, which means that the neural
network improved the cluster detection efficiency of its training sample. The
YOLO-CL selection function is approximately constant with redshift, with respect
to the MCXC2021 cluster mean X-ray surface brightness. YOLO-CL shows high
performance when compared to traditional detection algorithms applied to SDSS.
Deep learning networks benefit from a strong advantage over traditional galaxy
cluster detection techniques because they do not need galaxy photometric and
photometric redshift catalogs. This eliminates systematic uncertainties that can
be introduced during source detection, and photometry and photometric redshift
measurements. Our results show that YOLO-CL is an efficient alternative to
traditional cluster detection methods. In general, this work shows that it is
worth exploring the performance of deep convolution networks for future
cosmological cluster surveys, such as the Rubin/LSST, Euclid or the Roman Space
Telescope surveys.
