Title: Mineral Detection of Neutrinos and Dark Matter. A Whitepaper
Authors: Sebastian Baum, Patrick Stengel, Natsue Abe, Javier F. Acevedo,
Gabriela R. Araujo, Yoshihiro Asahara, Frank Avignone, Levente Balogh, Laura
Baudis, Yilda Boukhtouchen, Joseph Bramante, Pieter Alexander Breur, Lorenzo
Caccianiga, Francesco Capozzi, Juan I. Collar, Reza Ebadi, Thomas Edwards, Klaus
Eitel, Alexey Elykov, Rodney C. Ewing, Katherine Freese, Audrey Fung, Claudio
Galelli, Ulrich A. Glasmacher, Arianna Gleason, Noriko Hasebe, Shigenobu Hirose,
Shunsaku Horiuchi, Yasushi Hoshino, Patrick Huber, Yuki Ido, Yohei Igami, Norito
Ishikawa, Yoshitaka Itow, Takashi Kamiyama, Takenori Kato, Bradley J. Kavanagh,
Yoji Kawamura, Shingo Kazama, Christopher J. Kenney, Ben Kilminster, Yui
Kouketsu, Yukiko Kozaka, Noah A. Kurinsky, Matthew Leybourne, Thalles Lucas,
William F. McDonough, Mason C. Marshall, Jose Maria Mateos, Anubhav Mathur,
Katsuyoshi Michibayashi, Sharlotte Mkhonto, Kohta Murase, Tatsuhiro Naka, Kenji
Oguni, Surjeet Rajendran, Hitoshi Sakane, Paola Sala, Kate Scholberg, Ingrida
Semenec, Takuya Shiraishi, Joshua Spitz, Kai Sun, Katsuhiko Suzuki, Erwin H.
Tanin, Aaron Vincent, Nikita Vladimirov, Ronald L. Walsworth, Hiroko Watanabe
ID: 2301.07118
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.07118

Abstract:
Minerals are solid state nuclear track detectors - nuclear recoils in a mineral
leave latent damage to the crystal structure. Depending on the mineral and its
temperature, the damage features are retained in the material from minutes (in
low-melting point materials such as salts at a few hundred degrees C) to
timescales much larger than the 4.5 Gyr-age of the Solar System (in refractory
materials at room temperature). The damage features from the $O(50)$ MeV fission
fragments left by spontaneous fission of $^{238}$U and other heavy unstable
isotopes have long been used for fission track dating of geological samples.
Laboratory studies have demonstrated the readout of defects caused by nuclear
recoils with energies as small as $O(1)$ keV. This whitepaper discusses a wide
range of possible applications of minerals as detectors for $E_R \gtrsim O(1)$
keV nuclear recoils: Using natural minerals, one could use the damage features
accumulated over $O(10)$ Myr$-O(1)$ Gyr to measure astrophysical neutrino fluxes
(from the Sun, supernovae, or cosmic rays interacting with the atmosphere) as
well as search for Dark Matter. Using signals accumulated over months to few-
years timescales in laboratory-manufactured minerals, one could measure reactor
neutrinos or use them as Dark Matter detectors, potentially with directional
sensitivity. Research groups in Europe, Asia, and America have started
developing microscopy techniques to read out the $O(1) - O(100)$ nm damage
features in crystals left by $O(0.1) - O(100)$ keV nuclear recoils. We report on
the status and plans of these programs. The research program towards the
realization of such detectors is highly interdisciplinary, combining geoscience,
material science, applied and fundamental physics with techniques from quantum
information and Artificial Intelligence.
