Title: Time-sensitive Learning for Heterogeneous Federated Edge Intelligence
Authors: Yong Xiao, Xiaohan Zhang, Guangming Shi, Marwan Krunz, Diep N. Nguyen,
Dinh Thai Hoang
ID: 2301.10977
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.10977

Abstract:
Real-time machine learning has recently attracted significant interest due to
its potential to support instantaneous learning, adaptation, and decision making
in a wide range of application domains, including self-driving vehicles,
intelligent transportation, and industry automation. We investigate real-time ML
in a federated edge intelligence (FEI) system, an edge computing system that
implements federated learning (FL) solutions based on data samples collected and
uploaded from decentralized data networks. FEI systems often exhibit
heterogenous communication and computational resource distribution, as well as
non-i.i.d. data samples, resulting in long model training time and inefficient
resource utilization. Motivated by this fact, we propose a time-sensitive
federated learning (TS-FL) framework to minimize the overall run-time for
collaboratively training a shared ML model. Training acceleration solutions for
both TS-FL with synchronous coordination (TS-FL-SC) and asynchronous
coordination (TS-FL-ASC) are investigated. To address straggler effect in TS-FL-
SC, we develop an analytical solution to characterize the impact of selecting
different subsets of edge servers on the overall model training time. A server
dropping-based solution is proposed to allow slow-performance edge servers to be
removed from participating in model training if their impact on the resulting
model accuracy is limited. A joint optimization algorithm is proposed to
minimize the overall time consumption of model training by selecting
participating edge servers, local epoch number. We develop an analytical
expression to characterize the impact of staleness effect of asynchronous
coordination and straggler effect of FL on the time consumption of TS-FL-ASC.
Experimental results show that TS-FL-SC and TS-FL-ASC can provide up to 63% and
28% of reduction, in the overall model training time, respectively.
