Title: Selective Explanations: Leveraging Human Input to Align Explainable AI
Authors: Vivian Lai, Yiming Zhang, Chacha Chen, Q. Vera Liao, Chenhao Tan
ID: 2301.09656
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.09656

Abstract:
While a vast collection of explainable AI (XAI) algorithms have been developed
in recent years, they are often criticized for significant gaps with how humans
produce and consume explanations. As a result, current XAI techniques are often
found to be hard to use and lack effectiveness. In this work, we attempt to
close these gaps by making AI explanations selective -- a fundamental property
of human explanations -- by selectively presenting a subset from a large set of
model reasons based on what aligns with the recipient's preferences. We propose
a general framework for generating selective explanations by leveraging human
input on a small sample. This framework opens up a rich design space that
accounts for different selectivity goals, types of input, and more. As a
showcase, we use a decision-support task to explore selective explanations based
on what the decision-maker would consider relevant to the decision task. We
conducted two experimental studies to examine three out of a broader possible
set of paradigms based on our proposed framework: in Study 1, we ask the
participants to provide their own input to generate selective explanations, with
either open-ended or critique-based input. In Study 2, we show participants
selective explanations based on input from a panel of similar users
(annotators). Our experiments demonstrate the promise of selective explanations
in reducing over-reliance on AI and improving decision outcomes and subjective
perceptions of the AI, but also paint a nuanced picture that attributes some of
these positive effects to the opportunity to provide one's own input to augment
AI explanations. Overall, our work proposes a novel XAI framework inspired by
human communication behaviors and demonstrates its potentials to encourage
future work to better align AI explanations with human production and
consumption of explanations.
