Title: Forklens: Accurate weak-lensing shear measurement with deep learning
Authors: Zekang Zhang, Huanyuan Shan, Nan Li, Chengliang Wei, Ji Yao, Zhang Ban,
Yuedong Fang, Qi Guo, Dezi Liu, Guoliang Li, Lin Lin, Ming Li, Ran Li, Xiaobo
Li, Yu Luo, Xianmin Meng, Jundan Nie, Zhaoxiang Qi, Yisheng Qiu, Li Shao, Hao
Tian, Lei Wang, Wei Wang, Jingtian Xian, Youhua Xu, Tianmeng Zhang, Xin Zhang,
Zhimin Zhou
ID: 2301.02986
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.02986

Abstract:
Weak gravitational lensing is one of the most important probes of the nature of
dark matter and dark energy. In order to extract cosmological information from
next-generation weak lensing surveys (e.g., Euclid, Roman, LSST, and CSST) as
much as possible, accurate measurements of weak lensing shear are required.
There are existing algorithms to measure the weak lensing shear on imaging data,
which have been successfully applied in previous surveys. In the meantime,
machine learning (ML) has been widely recognized in various astrophysics
applications in modeling and observations. In this work, we present a fully
deep-learning-based approach to measuring weak lensing shear accurately. Our
approach comprises two modules. The first one contains a convolutional neural
network (CNN) with two branches for taking galaxy images and point spread
function (PSF) simultaneously, and the output of this module includes the
galaxy's magnitude, size, and shape. The second module includes a multiple-layer
neural network (NN) to calibrate weak-lensing shear measurements. We name the
program Forklens and make it publicly available online. Applying Forklens to
CSST-like mock images, we achieve consistent accuracy with traditional
approaches (such as moment-based measurement and forward model fitting) on the
sources with high signal-to-noise ratios (S/N, > 20). For the sources with S/N <
10, Forklens exhibits an $\sim 36\%$ higher Pearson coefficient on galaxy
ellipticity measurements. After adopting galaxy weighting, the shear
measurements with Forklens deliver accuracy levels to $0.2\%$. The whole
procedure of Forklens is automated and costs about $0.7$ milliseconds per
galaxy, which is appropriate for adequately taking advantage of the sky coverage
and depth of the upcoming weak lensing surveys.
