Title: Adaptive Value Decomposition with Greedy Marginal Contribution
Computation for Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Authors: Shanqi Liu, Yujing Hu, Runze Wu, Dong Xing, Yu Xiong, Changjie Fan, Kun
Kuang, Yong Liu
ID: 2302.06872
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.06872

Abstract:
Real-world cooperation often requires intensive coordination among agents
simultaneously. This task has been extensively studied within the framework of
cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), and value decomposition
methods are among those cutting-edge solutions. However, traditional methods
that learn the value function as a monotonic mixing of per-agent utilities
cannot solve the tasks with non-monotonic returns. This hinders their
application in generic scenarios. Recent methods tackle this problem from the
perspective of implicit credit assignment by learning value functions with
complete expressiveness or using additional structures to improve cooperation.
However, they are either difficult to learn due to large joint action spaces or
insufficient to capture the complicated interactions among agents which are
essential to solving tasks with non-monotonic returns. To address these
problems, we propose a novel explicit credit assignment method to address the
non-monotonic problem. Our method, Adaptive Value decomposition with Greedy
Marginal contribution (AVGM), is based on an adaptive value decomposition that
learns the cooperative value of a group of dynamically changing agents. We first
illustrate that the proposed value decomposition can consider the complicated
interactions among agents and is feasible to learn in large-scale scenarios.
Then, our method uses a greedy marginal contribution computed from the value
decomposition as an individual credit to incentivize agents to learn the optimal
cooperative policy. We further extend the module with an action encoder to
guarantee the linear time complexity for computing the greedy marginal
contribution. Experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves
significant performance improvements in several non-monotonic domains.
