Title: Attacking Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning by Adversarial
Minority Influence
Authors: Simin Li, Jun Guo, Jingqiao Xiu, Yuwei Zheng, Pu Feng, Xin Yu, Aishan
Liu, Yaodong Yang, Bo An, Wenjun Wu, Xianglong Liu
ID: 2302.03322
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.03322

Abstract:
This study probes the vulnerabilities of cooperative multi-agent reinforcement
learning (c-MARL) under adversarial attacks, a critical determinant of c-MARL's
worst-case performance prior to real-world implementation. Current observation-
based attacks, constrained by white-box assumptions, overlook c-MARL's complex
multi-agent interactions and cooperative objectives, resulting in impractical
and limited attack capabilities. To address these shortcomes, we propose
Adversarial Minority Influence (AMI), a practical and strong for c-MARL. AMI is
a practical black-box attack and can be launched without knowing victim
parameters. AMI is also strong by considering the complex multi-agent
interaction and the cooperative goal of agents, enabling a single adversarial
agent to unilaterally misleads majority victims to form targeted worst-case
cooperation. This mirrors minority influence phenomena in social psychology. To
achieve maximum deviation in victim policies under complex agent-wise
interactions, our unilateral attack aims to characterize and maximize the impact
of the adversary on the victims. This is achieved by adapting a unilateral
agent-wise relation metric derived from mutual information, thereby mitigating
the adverse effects of victim influence on the adversary. To lead the victims
into a jointly detrimental scenario, our targeted attack deceives victims into a
long-term, cooperatively harmful situation by guiding each victim towards a
specific target, determined through a trial-and-error process executed by a
reinforcement learning agent. Through AMI, we achieve the first successful
attack against real-world robot swarms and effectively fool agents in simulated
environments into collectively worst-case scenarios, including Starcraft II and
Multi-agent Mujoco. The source code and demonstrations can be found at:
https://github.com/DIG-Beihang/AMI.
