Title: Event-based Backpropagation for Analog Neuromorphic Hardware
Authors: Christian Pehle, Luca Blessing, Elias Arnold, Eric Müller, Johannes
Schemmel
ID: 2302.07141
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.07141

Abstract:
Neuromorphic computing aims to incorporate lessons from studying biological
nervous systems in the design of computer architectures. While existing
approaches have successfully implemented aspects of those computational
principles, such as sparse spike-based computation, event-based scalable
learning has remained an elusive goal in large-scale systems. However, only then
the potential energy-efficiency advantages of neuromorphic systems relative to
other hardware architectures can be realized during learning. We present our
progress implementing the EventProp algorithm using the example of the
BrainScaleS-2 analog neuromorphic hardware. Previous gradient-based approaches
to learning used "surrogate gradients" and dense sampling of observables or were
limited by assumptions on the underlying dynamics and loss functions. In
contrast, our approach only needs spike time observations from the system while
being able to incorporate other system observables, such as membrane voltage
measurements, in a principled way. This leads to a one-order-of-magnitude
improvement in the information efficiency of the gradient estimate, which would
directly translate to corresponding energy efficiency improvements in an
optimized hardware implementation. We present the theoretical framework for
estimating gradients and results verifying the correctness of the estimation, as
well as results on a low-dimensional classification task using the BrainScaleS-2
system. Building on this work has the potential to enable scalable gradient
estimation in large-scale neuromorphic hardware as a continuous measurement of
the system state would be prohibitive and energy-inefficient in such instances.
It also suggests the feasibility of a full on-device implementation of the
algorithm that would enable scalable, energy-efficient, event-based learning in
large-scale analog neuromorphic hardware.
