Title: On Inductive Biases for Machine Learning in Data Constrained Settings
Authors: Grégoire Mialon
ID: 2302.10692
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.10692

Abstract:
Learning with limited data is one of the biggest problems of machine learning.
Current approaches to this issue consist in learning general representations
from huge amounts of data before fine-tuning the model on a small dataset of
interest. While such technique, coined transfer learning, is very effective in
domains such as computer vision or natural langage processing, it does not yet
solve common problems of deep learning such as model interpretability or the
overall need for data. This thesis explores a different answer to the problem of
learning expressive models in data constrained settings: instead of relying on
big datasets to learn neural networks, we will replace some modules by known
functions reflecting the structure of the data. Very often, these functions will
be drawn from the rich literature of kernel methods. Indeed, many kernels can
reflect the underlying structure of the data, thus sparing learning parameters
to some extent. Our approach falls under the hood of "inductive biases", which
can be defined as hypothesis on the data at hand restricting the space of models
to explore during learning. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach in
the context of sequences, such as sentences in natural language or protein
sequences, and graphs, such as molecules. We also highlight the relationship
between our work and recent advances in deep learning. Additionally, we study
convex machine learning models. Here, rather than proposing new models, we
wonder which proportion of the samples in a dataset is really needed to learn a
"good" model. More precisely, we study the problem of safe sample screening,
i.e, executing simple tests to discard uninformative samples from a dataset even
before fitting a machine learning model, without affecting the optimal model.
Such techniques can be used to prune datasets or mine for rare samples.
