Title: Oxygenic photosynthetic responses of cyanobacteria exposed under an
M-dwarf starlight simulator: Implications for exoplanet's habitability
Authors: Mariano Battistuzzi, Lorenzo Cocola, Riccardo Claudi, Anna Caterina
Pozzer, Anna Segalla, Diana Simionato, Tomas Morosinotto, Luca Poletto,
Nicoletta La Rocca
ID: 2302.09396
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.09396

Abstract:
Introduction: The search for life on distant exoplanets is expected to rely on
atmospheric biosignatures detection, such as oxygen of biological origin.
However, it is not demonstrated how much oxygenic photosynthesis, which on Earth
depends on visible light, could work under spectral conditions simulating
exoplanets orbiting the Habitable Zone of M-dwarf stars, which have low light
emission in the visible and high light emission in the far-red/near-infrared. By
utilizing cyanobacteria, the first organisms to evolve oxygenic photosynthesis
on our planet, and a starlight simulator capable of accurately reproducing the
emission spectrum of an M-dwarf in the range 350-900 nm, we could answer this
question. Methods: We performed experiments with the cyanobacterium
Chlorogloeopsis fritschii PCC6912, capable of Far-Red Light Photoacclimation
(FaRLiP), which allows the strain to harvest far-red in addition to visible
light for photosynthesis, and Synechocystis sp. PCC6803, a species unable to
perform this photoacclimation, comparing their responses when exposed to three
simulated light spectra: M-dwarf, solar and far-red. We analysed growth and
photosynthetic acclimation features in terms of pigment composition and
photosystems organization. Finally, we determined the oxygen production of the
strains directly exposed to the different spectra. Results: Both cyanobacteria
were shown to grow and photosynthesize similarly under M-dwarf and solar light
conditions: Synechocystis sp. by utilizing the few photons in the visible, C.
fritschii by harvesting both visible and far-red light, activating the FaRLiP
response.
