Title: Generation Probabilities Are Not Enough: Uncertainty Highlighting in AI
Code Completions
Authors: Helena Vasconcelos, Gagan Bansal, Adam Fourney, Q. Vera Liao, Jennifer
Wortman Vaughan
ID: 2302.07248
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.07248

Abstract:
Large-scale generative models enabled the development of AI-powered code
completion tools to assist programmers in writing code. However, much like other
AI-powered tools, AI-powered code completions are not always accurate,
potentially introducing bugs or even security vulnerabilities into code if not
properly detected and corrected by a human programmer. One technique that has
been proposed and implemented to help programmers identify potential errors is
to highlight uncertain tokens. However, there have been no empirical studies
exploring the effectiveness of this technique -- nor investigating the different
and not-yet-agreed-upon notions of uncertainty in the context of generative
models. We explore the question of whether conveying information about
uncertainty enables programmers to more quickly and accurately produce code when
collaborating with an AI-powered code completion tool, and if so, what measure
of uncertainty best fits programmers' needs. Through a mixed-methods study with
30 programmers, we compare three conditions: providing the AI system's code
completion alone, highlighting tokens with the lowest likelihood of being
generated by the underlying generative model, and highlighting tokens with the
highest predicted likelihood of being edited by a programmer. We find that
highlighting tokens with the highest predicted likelihood of being edited leads
to faster task completion and more targeted edits, and is subjectively preferred
by study participants. In contrast, highlighting tokens according to their
probability of being generated does not provide any benefit over the baseline
with no highlighting. We further explore the design space of how to convey
uncertainty in AI-powered code completion tools, and find that programmers
prefer highlights that are granular, informative, interpretable, and not
overwhelming.
