Title: GFlowNets for AI-Driven Scientific Discovery
Authors: Moksh Jain, Tristan Deleu, Jason Hartford, Cheng-Hao Liu, Alex
Hernandez-Garcia, Yoshua Bengio
ID: 2302.00615
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.00615

Abstract:
Tackling the most pressing problems for humanity, such as the climate crisis and
the threat of global pandemics, requires accelerating the pace of scientific
discovery. While science has traditionally relied on trial and error and even
serendipity to a large extent, the last few decades have seen a surge of data-
driven scientific discoveries. However, in order to truly leverage large-scale
data sets and high-throughput experimental setups, machine learning methods will
need to be further improved and better integrated in the scientific discovery
pipeline. A key challenge for current machine learning methods in this context
is the efficient exploration of very large search spaces, which requires
techniques for estimating reducible (epistemic) uncertainty and generating sets
of diverse and informative experiments to perform. This motivated a new
probabilistic machine learning framework called GFlowNets, which can be applied
in the modeling, hypotheses generation and experimental design stages of the
experimental science loop. GFlowNets learn to sample from a distribution given
indirectly by a reward function corresponding to an unnormalized probability,
which enables sampling diverse, high-reward candidates. GFlowNets can also be
used to form efficient and amortized Bayesian posterior estimators for causal
models conditioned on the already acquired experimental data. Having such
posterior models can then provide estimators of epistemic uncertainty and
information gain that can drive an experimental design policy. Altogether, here
we will argue that GFlowNets can become a valuable tool for AI-driven scientific
discovery, especially in scenarios of very large candidate spaces where we have
access to cheap but inaccurate measurements or to expensive but accurate
measurements. This is a common setting in the context of drug and material
discovery, which we use as examples throughout the paper.
