Title: Dermatologist-like explainable AI enhances trust and confidence in
diagnosing melanoma
Authors: Tirtha Chanda, Katja Hauser, Sarah Hobelsberger, Tabea-Clara Bucher,
Carina Nogueira Garcia, Christoph Wies, Harald Kittler, Philipp Tschandl,
Cristian Navarrete-Dechent, Sebastian Podlipnik, Emmanouil Chousakos, Iva
Crnaric, Jovana Majstorovic, Linda Alhajwan, Tanya Foreman, Sandra Peternel,
Sergei Sarap, İrem Özdemir, Raymond L. Barnhill, Mar Llamas Velasco, Gabriela
Poch, Sören Korsing, Wiebke Sondermann, Frank Friedrich Gellrich, Markus V.
Heppt, Michael Erdmann, Sebastian Haferkamp, Konstantin Drexler, Matthias
Goebeler, Bastian Schilling, Jochen S. Utikal, Kamran Ghoreschi, Stefan
Fröhling, Eva Krieghoff-Henning, Titus J. Brinker
ID: 2303.12806
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12806

Abstract:
Although artificial intelligence (AI) systems have been shown to improve the
accuracy of initial melanoma diagnosis, the lack of transparency in how these
systems identify melanoma poses severe obstacles to user acceptance. Explainable
artificial intelligence (XAI) methods can help to increase transparency, but
most XAI methods are unable to produce precisely located domain-specific
explanations, making the explanations difficult to interpret. Moreover, the
impact of XAI methods on dermatologists has not yet been evaluated. Extending on
two existing classifiers, we developed an XAI system that produces text and
region based explanations that are easily interpretable by dermatologists
alongside its differential diagnoses of melanomas and nevi. To evaluate this
system, we conducted a three-part reader study to assess its impact on
clinicians' diagnostic accuracy, confidence, and trust in the XAI-support. We
showed that our XAI's explanations were highly aligned with clinicians'
explanations and that both the clinicians' trust in the support system and their
confidence in their diagnoses were significantly increased when using our XAI
compared to using a conventional AI system. The clinicians' diagnostic accuracy
was numerically, albeit not significantly, increased. This work demonstrates
that clinicians are willing to adopt such an XAI system, motivating their future
use in the clinic.
