Title: Science opportunities with solar sailing smallsats
Authors: Slava G. Turyshev, Darren Garber, Louis D. Friedman, Andreas M. Hein,
Nathan Barnes, Konstantin Batygin, G. David Brin, Michael E. Brown, Leroy
Cronin, Artur Davoyan, Amber Dubill, T. Marshall Eubanks, Sarah Gibson, Donald
M. Hassler, Noam R. Izenberg, Pierre Kervella, Philip D. Mauskopf, Neil Murphy,
Andrew Nutter, Carolyn Porco, Dario Riccobono, James Schalkwyk, Kevin B.
Stevenson, Mark V. Sykes, Mahmooda Sultana, Viktor T. Toth, Marco Velli, S. Pete
Worden
ID: 2303.14917
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.14917

Abstract:
Recently, we witnessed how the synergy of small satellite technology and solar
sailing propulsion enables new missions. Together, small satellites with
lightweight instruments and solar sails offer affordable access to deep regions
of the solar system, also making it possible to realize hard-to-reach
trajectories that are not constrained to the ecliptic plane. Combining these two
technologies can drastically reduce travel times within the solar system, while
delivering robust science. With solar sailing propulsion capable of reaching the
velocities of ~5-10 AU/yr, missions using a rideshare launch may reach the
Jovian system in two years, Saturn in three. The same technologies could allow
reaching solar polar orbits in less than two years. Fast, cost-effective, and
maneuverable sailcraft that may travel outside the ecliptic plane open new
opportunities for affordable solar system exploration, with great promise for
heliophysics, planetary science, and astrophysics. Such missions could be
modularized to reach different destinations with different sets of instruments.
Benefiting from this progress, we present the "Sundiver" concept, offering novel
possibilities for the science community. We discuss some of the key
technologies, the current design of the Sundiver sailcraft vehicle and
innovative instruments, along with unique science opportunities that these
technologies enable, especially as this exploration paradigm evolves. We
formulate policy recommendations to allow national space agencies, industry, and
other stakeholders to establish a strong scientific, programmatic, and
commercial focus, enrich and deepen the space enterprise and broaden its
advocacy base by including the Sundiver paradigm as a part of broader space
exploration efforts.
