Title: A Survey on Secure and Private Federated Learning Using Blockchain:
Theory and Application in Resource-constrained Computing
Authors: Ervin Moore, Ahmed Imteaj, Shabnam Rezapour, M. Hadi Amini
ID: 2303.13727
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.13727

Abstract:
Federated Learning (FL) has gained widespread popularity in recent years due to
the fast booming of advanced machine learning and artificial intelligence along
with emerging security and privacy threats. FL enables efficient model
generation from local data storage of the edge devices without revealing the
sensitive data to any entities. While this paradigm partly mitigates the privacy
issues of users' sensitive data, the performance of the FL process can be
threatened and reached a bottleneck due to the growing cyber threats and privacy
violation techniques. To expedite the proliferation of FL process, the
integration of blockchain for FL environments has drawn prolific attention from
the people of academia and industry. Blockchain has the potential to prevent
security and privacy threats with its decentralization, immutability, consensus,
and transparency characteristic. However, if the blockchain mechanism requires
costly computational resources, then the resource-constrained FL clients cannot
be involved in the training. Considering that, this survey focuses on reviewing
the challenges, solutions, and future directions for the successful deployment
of blockchain in resource-constrained FL environments. We comprehensively review
variant blockchain mechanisms that are suitable for FL process and discuss their
trade-offs for a limited resource budget. Further, we extensively analyze the
cyber threats that could be observed in a resource-constrained FL environment,
and how blockchain can play a key role to block those cyber attacks. To this
end, we highlight some potential solutions towards the coupling of blockchain
and federated learning that can offer high levels of reliability, data privacy,
and distributed computing performance.
