Title: TRUSformer: Improving Prostate Cancer Detection from Micro-Ultrasound
Using Attention and Self-Supervision
Authors: Mahdi Gilany, Paul Wilson, Andrea Perera-Ortega, Amoon Jamzad, Minh
Nguyen Nhat To, Fahimeh Fooladgar, Brian Wodlinger, Purang Abolmaesumi, Parvin
Mousavi
ID: 2303.02128
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.02128

Abstract:
A large body of previous machine learning methods for ultrasound-based prostate
cancer detection classify small regions of interest (ROIs) of ultrasound signals
that lie within a larger needle trace corresponding to a prostate tissue biopsy
(called biopsy core). These ROI-scale models suffer from weak labeling as
histopathology results available for biopsy cores only approximate the
distribution of cancer in the ROIs. ROI-scale models do not take advantage of
contextual information that are normally considered by pathologists, i.e. they
do not consider information about surrounding tissue and larger-scale trends
when identifying cancer. We aim to improve cancer detection by taking a multi-
scale, i.e. ROI-scale and biopsy core-scale, approach. Methods: Our multi-scale
approach combines (i) an "ROI-scale" model trained using self-supervised
learning to extract features from small ROIs and (ii) a "core-scale" transformer
model that processes a collection of extracted features from multiple ROIs in
the needle trace region to predict the tissue type of the corresponding core.
Attention maps, as a byproduct, allow us to localize cancer at the ROI scale. We
analyze this method using a dataset of micro-ultrasound acquired from 578
patients who underwent prostate biopsy, and compare our model to baseline models
and other large-scale studies in the literature. Results and Conclusions: Our
model shows consistent and substantial performance improvements compared to ROI-
scale-only models. It achieves 80.3% AUROC, a statistically significant
improvement over ROI-scale classification. We also compare our method to large
studies on prostate cancer detection, using other imaging modalities. Our code
is publicly available at www.github.com/med-i-lab/TRUSFormer
