Title: Machine Learning Approaches in Agile Manufacturing with Recycled
Materials for Sustainability
Authors: Aparna S. Varde, Jianyu Liang
ID: 2303.08291
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08291

Abstract:
It is important to develop sustainable processes in materials science and
manufacturing that are environmentally friendly. AI can play a significant role
in decision support here as evident from our earlier research leading to tools
developed using our proposed machine learning based approaches. Such tools
served the purpose of computational estimation and expert systems. This research
addresses environmental sustainability in materials science via decision support
in agile manufacturing using recycled and reclaimed materials. It is a safe and
responsible way to turn a specific waste stream to value-added products. We
propose to use data-driven methods in AI by applying machine learning models for
predictive analysis to guide decision support in manufacturing. This includes
harnessing artificial neural networks to study parameters affecting heat
treatment of materials and impacts on their properties; deep learning via
advances such as convolutional neural networks to explore grain size detection;
and other classifiers such as Random Forests to analyze phrase fraction
detection. Results with all these methods seem promising to embark on further
work, e.g. ANN yields accuracy around 90\% for predicting micro-structure
development as per quench tempering, a heat treatment process. Future work
entails several challenges: investigating various computer vision models (VGG,
ResNet etc.) to find optimal accuracy, efficiency and robustness adequate for
sustainable processes; creating domain-specific tools using machine learning for
decision support in agile manufacturing; and assessing impacts on sustainability
with metrics incorporating the appropriate use of recycled materials as well as
the effectiveness of developed products. Our work makes impacts on green
technology for smart manufacturing, and is motivated by related work in the
highly interesting realm of AI for materials science.
