Title: A CNN-LSTM Architecture for Marine Vessel Track Association Using
Automatic Identification System (AIS) Data
Authors: Md Asif Bin Syed, Imtiaz Ahmed
ID: 2303.14068
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.14068

Abstract:
In marine surveillance, distinguishing between normal and anomalous vessel
movement patterns is critical for identifying potential threats in a timely
manner. Once detected, it is important to monitor and track these vessels until
a necessary intervention occurs. To achieve this, track association algorithms
are used, which take sequential observations comprising geological and motion
parameters of the vessels and associate them with respective vessels. The
spatial and temporal variations inherent in these sequential observations make
the association task challenging for traditional multi-object tracking
algorithms. Additionally, the presence of overlapping tracks and missing data
can further complicate the trajectory tracking process. To address these
challenges, in this study, we approach this tracking task as a multivariate time
series problem and introduce a 1D CNN-LSTM architecture-based framework for
track association. This special neural network architecture can capture the
spatial patterns as well as the long-term temporal relations that exist among
the sequential observations. During the training process, it learns and builds
the trajectory for each of these underlying vessels. Once trained, the proposed
framework takes the marine vessel's location and motion data collected through
the Automatic Identification System (AIS) as input and returns the most likely
vessel track as output in real-time. To evaluate the performance of our
approach, we utilize an AIS dataset containing observations from 327 vessels
traveling in a specific geographic region. We measure the performance of our
proposed framework using standard performance metrics such as accuracy,
precision, recall, and F1 score. When compared with other competitive neural
network architectures our approach demonstrates a superior tracking performance.
