Title: High-throughput optical neural networks based on temporal computing
Authors: Shuang Zheng, Jiawei Zhang, Weifeng Zhang
ID: 2303.01287
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.01287

Abstract:
An emerging generative artificial intelligence (AI) based on neural networks
starts to grow in popularity with a revolutionizing capability of creating new
and original content. As giant generative models with millions to billions of
parameters are developed, trained and maintained, a massive and energy-efficient
computing power is highly required. However, conventional digital computers are
struggling to keep up with the pace of the generative model improvements. In
this paper, we propose and demonstrate high-throughput optical neural networks
based on temporal computing. The core weighted summation operation is realized
with the use of high-speed electro-optic modulation and low-speed balanced
photodetection. The input data and weight are encoded in a time sequence
separately and loaded on an optical signal via two electro-optic modulators
sequentially. By precisely controlling the synchronization time of the data and
weight loading, the matrix multiplication is performed. Followed by a balanced
photodetector, the summation is conducted, thanks to the electron accumulation
of the inherent electronic integrator circuit of the low-speed photodetector.
Thus, the linear weighted summation operation is implemented based on temporal
computing in the optical domain. With the proposed optical linear weighted
summation, a fully-connected neural network and convolutional neural network are
realized. Thanks to the high-speed feature of temporal computing, a high data
throughput of the optical neural network is experimentally demonstrated, and the
weighting coefficients can be specified on demand, which enables a strong
programmability of the optical neural network. By leveraging wavelength
multiplexing technology, a scalable optical neural network could be created with
a massive computing power and strong reconfigurability, which holds great
potential for future giant AI applications.
