Title: LMDA-Net:A lightweight multi-dimensional attention network for general
EEG-based brain-computer interface paradigms and interpretability
Authors: Zhengqing Miao, Xin Zhang, Meirong Zhao, Dong Ming
ID: 2303.16407
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.16407

Abstract:
EEG-based recognition of activities and states involves the use of prior
neuroscience knowledge to generate quantitative EEG features, which may limit
BCI performance. Although neural network-based methods can effectively extract
features, they often encounter issues such as poor generalization across
datasets, high predicting volatility, and low model interpretability. Hence, we
propose a novel lightweight multi-dimensional attention network, called LMDA-
Net. By incorporating two novel attention modules designed specifically for EEG
signals, the channel attention module and the depth attention module, LMDA-Net
can effectively integrate features from multiple dimensions, resulting in
improved classification performance across various BCI tasks. LMDA-Net was
evaluated on four high-impact public datasets, including motor imagery (MI) and
P300-Speller paradigms, and was compared with other representative models. The
experimental results demonstrate that LMDA-Net outperforms other representative
methods in terms of classification accuracy and predicting volatility, achieving
the highest accuracy in all datasets within 300 training epochs. Ablation
experiments further confirm the effectiveness of the channel attention module
and the depth attention module. To facilitate an in-depth understanding of the
features extracted by LMDA-Net, we propose class-specific neural network feature
interpretability algorithms that are suitable for event-related potentials
(ERPs) and event-related desynchronization/synchronization (ERD/ERS). By mapping
the output of the specific layer of LMDA-Net to the time or spatial domain
through class activation maps, the resulting feature visualizations can provide
interpretable analysis and establish connections with EEG time-spatial analysis
in neuroscience. In summary, LMDA-Net shows great potential as a general online
decoding model for various EEG tasks.
