Title: Automated wildlife image classification: An active learning tool for
ecological applications
Authors: Ludwig Bothmann, Lisa Wimmer, Omid Charrakh, Tobias Weber, Hendrik
Edelhoff, Wibke Peters, Hien Nguyen, Caryl Benjamin, Annette Menzel
ID: 2303.15823
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.15823

Abstract:
Wildlife camera trap images are being used extensively to investigate animal
abundance, habitat associations, and behavior, which is complicated by the fact
that experts must first classify the images manually. Artificial intelligence
systems can take over this task but usually need a large number of already-
labeled training images to achieve sufficient performance. This requirement
necessitates human expert labor and poses a particular challenge for projects
with few cameras or short durations. We propose a label-efficient learning
strategy that enables researchers with small or medium-sized image databases to
leverage the potential of modern machine learning, thus freeing crucial
resources for subsequent analyses.
  Our methodological proposal is two-fold: (1) We improve current strategies of
combining object detection and image classification by tuning the
hyperparameters of both models. (2) We provide an active learning (AL) system
that allows training deep learning models very efficiently in terms of required
human-labeled training images. We supply a software package that enables
researchers to use these methods directly and thereby ensure the broad
applicability of the proposed framework in ecological practice.
  We show that our tuning strategy improves predictive performance. We
demonstrate how the AL pipeline reduces the amount of pre-labeled data needed to
achieve a specific predictive performance and that it is especially valuable for
improving out-of-sample predictive performance.
  We conclude that the combination of tuning and AL increases predictive
performance substantially. Furthermore, we argue that our work can broadly
impact the community through the ready-to-use software package provided.
Finally, the publication of our models tailored to European wildlife data
enriches existing model bases mostly trained on data from Africa and North
America.
