Title: Cybersecurity of AI medical devices: risks, legislation, and challenges
Authors: Elisabetta Biasin, Erik Kamenjasevic, Kaspar Rosager Ludvigsen
ID: 2303.03140
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.03140

Abstract:
Medical devices and artificial intelligence systems rapidly transform healthcare
provisions. At the same time, due to their nature, AI in or as medical devices
might get exposed to cyberattacks, leading to patient safety and security risks.
This book chapter is divided into three parts. The first part starts by setting
the scene where we explain the role of cybersecurity in healthcare. Then, we
briefly define what we refer to when we talk about AI that is considered a
medical device by itself or supports one. To illustrate the risks such medical
devices pose, we provide three examples: the poisoning of datasets, social
engineering, and data or source code extraction. In the second part, the paper
provides an overview of the European Union's regulatory framework relevant for
ensuring the cybersecurity of AI as or in medical devices (MDR, NIS Directive,
Cybersecurity Act, GDPR, the AI Act proposal and the NIS 2 Directive proposal).
Finally, the third part of the paper examines possible challenges stemming from
the EU regulatory framework. In particular, we look toward the challenges
deriving from the two legislative proposals and their interaction with the
existing legislation concerning AI medical devices' cybersecurity. They are
structured as answers to the following questions: (1) how will the AI Act
interact with the MDR regarding the cybersecurity and safety requirements?; (2)
how should we interpret incident notification requirements from the NIS 2
Directive proposal and MDR?; and (3) what are the consequences of the evolving
term of critical infrastructures?
  [This is a draft chapter. The final version will be available in Research
Handbook on Health, AI and the Law edited by Barry Solaiman & I. Glenn Cohen,
forthcoming 2023, Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd]
