Title: Black holes and hot shells in the Euclidean path integral approach to
quantum gravity
Authors: José P. S. Lemos, O. B. Zaslavskii
ID: 2304.06740
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.06740

Abstract:
We study a spherical black hole surrounded by a hot self-gravitating thin shell
in the canonical ensemble, i.e., a black hole and a hot shell inside a heat
reservoir acting as a boundary with its area and temperature fixed. To work out
the quantum partition function, from which the thermodynamics of the system
follows, we use the Euclidean path integral approach to quantum gravity that
identifies the path integral of the gravitational system with the partition
function. In a semiclassical approximation, one needs only to compute the
classical action of the system. Then, one finds that the total entropy, i.e.,
the sum of black hole and matter entropies, is a function of the gravitational
radius of the system alone. So, the black hole inside the shell has no direct
influence on the entropy. One also finds the free energy, the thermodynamic
energy, and the temperature stratification. The reservoir temperature is
composed of a free function of the gravitational radius of the system divided by
the redshift. Upon specification of the reduced temperature free function, the
solutions for the gravitational radii compatible with the data are found. The
black hole inside has two possible horizon radii. It is shown that there is a
first law of thermodynamics for the system, another for the hot shell, and yet
another for the black hole. A thermodynamic stability analysis is performed. By
specifying for the free function the Hawking temperature for the gravitational
radius of the system, which is not a black hole, one finds a remarkable exact
thermodynamic solution. With it one establishes that pure black holes, hot
shells with a black hole, pure hot shells, and hot flat spaces are phases that
cohabit in the ensemble, with some acting as thermodynamic mimickers. This exact
solution is a model to situations involving black holes and hot gravitons. The
high temperature limits reveal important aspects.
