Title: On the Effectiveness of Image Manipulation Detection in the Age of Social
Media
Authors: Rosaura G. VidalMata, Priscila Saboia, Daniel Moreira, Grant Jensen,
Jason Schlessman, Walter J. Scheirer
ID: 2304.09414
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.09414

Abstract:
Image manipulation detection algorithms designed to identify local anomalies
often rely on the manipulated regions being ``sufficiently'' different from the
rest of the non-tampered regions in the image. However, such anomalies might not
be easily identifiable in high-quality manipulations, and their use is often
based on the assumption that certain image phenomena are associated with the use
of specific editing tools. This makes the task of manipulation detection hard in
and of itself, with state-of-the-art detectors only being able to detect a
limited number of manipulation types. More importantly, in cases where the
anomaly assumption does not hold, the detection of false positives in otherwise
non-manipulated images becomes a serious problem.
  To understand the current state of manipulation detection, we present an in-
depth analysis of deep learning-based and learning-free methods, assessing their
performance on different benchmark datasets containing tampered and non-tampered
samples. We provide a comprehensive study of their suitability for detecting
different manipulations as well as their robustness when presented with non-
tampered data. Furthermore, we propose a novel deep learning-based pre-
processing technique that accentuates the anomalies present in manipulated
regions to make them more identifiable by a variety of manipulation detection
methods. To this end, we introduce an anomaly enhancement loss that, when used
with a residual architecture, improves the performance of different detection
algorithms with a minimal introduction of false positives on the non-manipulated
data.
  Lastly, we introduce an open-source manipulation detection toolkit comprising
a number of standard detection algorithms.
