Title: AGI: Artificial General Intelligence for Education
Authors: Ehsan Latif, Gengchen Mai, Matthew Nyaaba, Xuansheng Wu, Ninghao Liu,
Guoyu Lu, Sheng Li, Tianming Liu, Xiaoming Zhai
ID: 2304.12479
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.12479

Abstract:
Artificial general intelligence (AGI) has gained global recognition as a future
technology due to the emergence of breakthrough large language models and
chatbots such as GPT-4 and ChatGPT, respectively. Compared to conventional AI
models, typically designed for a limited range of tasks, demand significant
amounts of domain-specific data for training and may not always consider
intricate interpersonal dynamics in education. AGI, driven by the recent large
pre-trained models, represents a significant leap in the capability of machines
to perform tasks that require human-level intelligence, such as reasoning,
problem-solving, decision-making, and even understanding human emotions and
social interactions. This position paper reviews AGI's key concepts,
capabilities, scope, and potential within future education, including achieving
future educational goals, designing pedagogy and curriculum, and performing
assessments. It highlights that AGI can significantly improve intelligent
tutoring systems, educational assessment, and evaluation procedures. AGI systems
can adapt to individual student needs, offering tailored learning experiences.
They can also provide comprehensive feedback on student performance and
dynamically adjust teaching methods based on student progress. The paper
emphasizes that AGI's capabilities extend to understanding human emotions and
social interactions, which are critical in educational settings. The paper
discusses that ethical issues in education with AGI include data bias, fairness,
and privacy and emphasizes the need for codes of conduct to ensure responsible
AGI use in academic settings like homework, teaching, and recruitment. We also
conclude that the development of AGI necessitates interdisciplinary
collaborations between educators and AI engineers to advance research and
application efforts.
