Title: MHD study of extreme space weather conditions for exoplanets with Earth-
like magnetospheres: On habitability conditions and radio-emission
Authors: J. Varela, A. S. Brun, P. Zarka, A. Strugarek, F. Pantellini, V.
Reville
ID: 2304.08771
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.08771

Abstract:
The present study aims at characterizing the habitability conditions of
exoplanets with an Earth-like magnetosphere inside the habitable zone of M stars
and F stars like tau Boo, caused by the direct deposition of the stellar wind on
the exoplanet surface if the magnetosphere shielding is inefficient. In
addition, the radio emission generated by exoplanets with a Earth-like
magnetosphere is calculated for different space weather conditions. The study is
based on a set of MHD simulations performed by the code PLUTO reproducing the
space weather conditions expected for exoplanets orbiting the habitable zone of
M stars and F stars type tau Boo. Exoplanets hosted by M stars at 0.2 au are
protected from the stellar wind during regular and CME-like space weather
conditions if the star rotation period is slower than 3 days, that is to say,
faster rotators generate stellar winds and interplanetary magnetic fields large
enough to endanger the exoplanet habitability. Exoplanets hosted by a F stars
type tau Boo at >= 2.5 au are protected during regular space weather conditions,
but a stronger magnetic field compared to the Earth is mandatory if the
exoplanet is close to the inner edge of the star habitable zone (2.5 au) to
shield the exoplanet surface during CME-like space weather conditions. The range
of radio emission values calculated in the simulations are consistent with the
scaling proposed by [Zarka 2018] during regular and common CME-like space
weather conditions. If the radio telescopes measure a relative low radio
emission signal with small variability from an exoplanet, that may indicate
favorable exoplanet habitability conditions with respect to the space weather
states considered and the intrinsic magnetic field of the exoplanet.
