Title: Towards Addressing Training Data Scarcity Challenge in Emerging Radio
Access Networks: A Survey and Framework
Authors: Haneya Naeem Qureshi, Usama Masood, Marvin Manalastas, Syed Muhammad
Asad Zaidi, Hasan Farooq, Julien Forgeat, Maxime Bouton, Shruti Bothe, Per
Karlsson, Ali Rizwan, Ali Imran
ID: 2304.12480
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.12480

Abstract:
The future of cellular networks is contingent on artificial intelligence (AI)
based automation, particularly for radio access network (RAN) operation,
optimization, and troubleshooting. To achieve such zero-touch automation, a
myriad of AI-based solutions are being proposed in literature for modeling and
optimizing network behavior to achieve the zero-touch automation goal. However,
to work reliably, AI based automation, requires a deluge of training data.
Consequently, the success of AI solutions is limited by a fundamental challenge
faced by cellular network research community: scarcity of training data. We
present an extensive review of classic and emerging techniques to address this
challenge. We first identify the common data types in RAN and their known use-
cases. We then present a taxonomized survey of techniques to address training
data scarcity for various data types. This is followed by a framework to address
the training data scarcity. The framework builds on available information and
combination of techniques including interpolation, domain-knowledge based,
generative adversarial neural networks, transfer learning, autoencoders, few-
shot learning, simulators, and testbeds. Potential new techniques to enrich
scarce data in cellular networks are also proposed, such as by matrix completion
theory, and domain knowledge-based techniques leveraging different network
parameters and geometries. An overview of state-of-the art simulators and
testbeds is also presented to make readers aware of current and emerging
platforms for real data access. The extensive survey of training data scarcity
addressing techniques combined with proposed framework to select a suitable
technique for given type of data, can assist researchers and network operators
in choosing appropriate methods to overcome the data scarcity challenge in
leveraging AI to radio access network automation.
