Title: Physics-informed Data-driven Discovery of Constitutive Models with
Application to Strain-Rate-sensitive Soft Materials
Authors: Kshitiz Upadhyay, Jan N. Fuhg, Nikolaos Bouklas, K. T. Ramesh
ID: 2304.13897
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.13897

Abstract:
A novel data-driven constitutive modeling approach is proposed, which combines
the physics-informed nature of modeling based on continuum thermodynamics with
the benefits of machine learning. This approach is demonstrated on strain-rate-
sensitive soft materials. This model is based on the viscous dissipation-based
visco-hyperelasticity framework where the total stress is decomposed into
volumetric, isochoric hyperelastic, and isochoric viscous overstress
contributions. It is shown that each of these stress components can be written
as linear combinations of the components of an irreducible integrity basis.
Three Gaussian process regression-based surrogate models are trained (one per
stress component) between principal invariants of strain and strain rate tensors
and the corresponding coefficients of the integrity basis components. It is
demonstrated that this type of model construction enforces key physics-based
constraints on the predicted responses: the second law of thermodynamics, the
principles of local action and determinism, objectivity, the balance of angular
momentum, an assumed reference state, isotropy, and limited memory. The three
surrogate models that constitute our constitutive model are evaluated by
training them on small-size numerically generated data sets corresponding to a
single deformation mode and then analyzing their predictions over a much wider
testing regime comprising multiple deformation modes. Our physics-informed data-
driven constitutive model predictions are compared with the corresponding
predictions of classical continuum thermodynamics-based and purely data-driven
models. It is shown that our surrogate models can reasonably capture the stress-
strain-strain rate responses in both training and testing regimes, and provide
improvements in terms of prediction accuracy, generalizability to multiple
deformation modes, and compatibility with limited data.
