Title: Towards Medical Artificial General Intelligence via Knowledge-Enhanced
Multimodal Pretraining
Authors: Bingqian Lin, Zicong Chen, Mingjie Li, Haokun Lin, Hang Xu, Yi Zhu,
Jianzhuang Liu, Wenjia Cai, Lei Yang, Shen Zhao, Chenfei Wu, Ling Chen, Xiaojun
Chang, Yi Yang, Lei Xing, Xiaodan Liang
ID: 2304.14204
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.14204

Abstract:
Medical artificial general intelligence (MAGI) enables one foundation model to
solve different medical tasks, which is very practical in the medical domain. It
can significantly reduce the requirement of large amounts of task-specific data
by sufficiently sharing medical knowledge among different tasks. However, due to
the challenges of designing strongly generalizable models with limited and
complex medical data, most existing approaches tend to develop task-specific
models. To take a step towards MAGI, we propose a new paradigm called Medical-
knOwledge-enhanced mulTimOdal pretRaining (MOTOR). In MOTOR, we combine two
kinds of basic medical knowledge, i.e., general and specific knowledge, in a
complementary manner to boost the general pretraining process. As a result, the
foundation model with comprehensive basic knowledge can learn compact
representations from pretraining radiographic data for better cross-modal
alignment. MOTOR unifies the understanding and generation, which are two kinds
of core intelligence of an AI system, into a single medical foundation model, to
flexibly handle more diverse medical tasks. To enable a comprehensive evaluation
and facilitate further research, we construct a medical multimodal benchmark
including a wide range of downstream tasks, such as chest x-ray report
generation and medical visual question answering. Extensive experiments on our
benchmark show that MOTOR obtains promising results through simple task-oriented
adaptation. The visualization shows that the injected knowledge successfully
highlights key information in the medical data, demonstrating the excellent
interpretability of MOTOR. Our MOTOR successfully mimics the human practice of
fulfilling a "medical student" to accelerate the process of becoming a
"specialist". We believe that our work makes a significant stride in realizing
MAGI.
