Title: Onboard Science Instrument Autonomy for the Detection of Microscopy
Biosignatures on the Ocean Worlds Life Surveyor
Authors: Mark Wronkiewicz, Jake Lee, Lukas Mandrake, Jack Lightholder, Gary
Doran, Steffen Mauceri, Taewoo Kim, Nathan Oborny, Thomas Schibler, Jay Nadeau,
James K. Wallace, Eshaan Moorjani, Chris Lindensmith
ID: 2304.13189
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.13189

Abstract:
The quest to find extraterrestrial life is a critical scientific endeavor with
civilization-level implications. Icy moons in our solar system are promising
targets for exploration because their liquid oceans make them potential habitats
for microscopic life. However, the lack of a precise definition of life poses a
fundamental challenge to formulating detection strategies. To increase the
chances of unambiguous detection, a suite of complementary instruments must
sample multiple independent biosignatures (e.g., composition, motility/behavior,
and visible structure). Such an instrument suite could generate 10,000x more raw
data than is possible to transmit from distant ocean worlds like Enceladus or
Europa. To address this bandwidth limitation, Onboard Science Instrument
Autonomy (OSIA) is an emerging discipline of flight systems capable of
evaluating, summarizing, and prioritizing observational instrument data to
maximize science return. We describe two OSIA implementations developed as part
of the Ocean Worlds Life Surveyor (OWLS) prototype instrument suite at the Jet
Propulsion Laboratory. The first identifies life-like motion in digital
holographic microscopy videos, and the second identifies cellular structure and
composition via innate and dye-induced fluorescence. Flight-like requirements
and computational constraints were used to lower barriers to infusion, similar
to those available on the Mars helicopter, "Ingenuity." We evaluated the OSIA's
performance using simulated and laboratory data and conducted a live field test
at the hypersaline Mono Lake planetary analog site. Our study demonstrates the
potential of OSIA for enabling biosignature detection and provides insights and
lessons learned for future mission concepts aimed at exploring the outer solar
system.
