Title: Neuromorphic Control using Input-Weighted Threshold Adaptation
Authors: Stein Stroobants, Christophe De Wagter, Guido C. H. E. de Croon
ID: 2304.08778
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.08778

Abstract:
Neuromorphic processing promises high energy efficiency and rapid response
rates, making it an ideal candidate for achieving autonomous flight of resource-
constrained robots. It will be especially beneficial for complex neural networks
as are involved in high-level visual perception. However, fully neuromorphic
solutions will also need to tackle low-level control tasks. Remarkably, it is
currently still challenging to replicate even basic low-level controllers such
as proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controllers. Specifically, it is
difficult to incorporate the integral and derivative parts. To address this
problem, we propose a neuromorphic controller that incorporates proportional,
integral, and derivative pathways during learning. Our approach includes a novel
input threshold adaptation mechanism for the integral pathway. This Input-
Weighted Threshold Adaptation (IWTA) introduces an additional weight per
synaptic connection, which is used to adapt the threshold of the post-synaptic
neuron. We tackle the derivative term by employing neurons with different time
constants. We first analyze the performance and limits of the proposed
mechanisms and then put our controller to the test by implementing it on a
microcontroller connected to the open-source tiny Crazyflie quadrotor, replacing
the innermost rate controller. We demonstrate the stability of our bio-inspired
algorithm with flights in the presence of disturbances. The current work
represents a substantial step towards controlling highly dynamic systems with
neuromorphic algorithms, thus advancing neuromorphic processing and robotics. In
addition, integration is an important part of any temporal task, so the proposed
Input-Weighted Threshold Adaptation (IWTA) mechanism may have implications well
beyond control tasks.
