Title: Training Is Everything: Artificial Intelligence, Copyright, and Fair
Training
Authors: Andrew W. Torrance, Bill Tomlinson
ID: 2305.03720
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.03720

Abstract:
To learn how to behave, the current revolutionary generation of AIs must be
trained on vast quantities of published images, written works, and sounds, many
of which fall within the core subject matter of copyright law. To some, the use
of copyrighted works as training sets for AI is merely a transitory and non-
consumptive use that does not materially interfere with owners' content or
copyrights protecting it. Companies that use such content to train their AI
engine often believe such usage should be considered "fair use" under United
States law (sometimes known as "fair dealing" in other countries). By contrast,
many copyright owners, as well as their supporters, consider the incorporation
of copyrighted works into training sets for AI to constitute misappropriation of
owners' intellectual property, and, thus, decidedly not fair use under the law.
This debate is vital to the future trajectory of AI and its applications.
  In this article, we analyze the arguments in favor of, and against, viewing
the use of copyrighted works in training sets for AI as fair use. We call this
form of fair use "fair training". We identify both strong and spurious arguments
on both sides of this debate. In addition, we attempt to take a broader
perspective, weighing the societal costs (e.g., replacement of certain forms of
human employment) and benefits (e.g., the possibility of novel AI-based
approaches to global issues such as environmental disruption) of allowing AI to
make easy use of copyrighted works as training sets to facilitate the
development, improvement, adoption, and diffusion of AI. Finally, we suggest
that the debate over AI and copyrighted works may be a tempest in a teapot when
placed in the wider context of massive societal challenges such as poverty,
equality, climate change, and loss of biodiversity, to which AI may be part of
the solution.
