Title: On procedural urban digital twin generation and visualization of large
scale data
Authors: Sanjay Somanath, Vasilis Naserentin, Orfeas Eleftheriou, Daniel Sjölie,
Beata Stahre Wästberg, Anders Logg
ID: 2305.02242
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.02242

Abstract:
The desired outcome for urban digital twins is an automatically generated
detailed 3D model of a building from aerial imagery, footprints, LiDAR, or a
fusion of these. Such 3D models have applications in architecture, civil
engineering, urban planning, construction, real estate, GIS, and many others.
Further, the visualization of large-scale data in conjunction with the generated
3D models is often a recurring and resource-intensive task. However, a
completely automated end-to-end workflow is complex, requiring many steps to
achieve a high-quality visualization. Methods for building reconstruction
approaches have come a long way from previously manual approaches to semi-
automatic or automatic approaches. The next step after reconstructing buildings
is visualizing the buildings and their context. Advances in real-time rendering
using game engines have enabled the extension of building reconstruction methods
to procedurally generated context generation. This paper aims to complement
existing methods of 3D building generation. First, we present a literature
review covering different options for procedurally generated context generation
and visualization methods in-depth, focusing on workflows and data pipelines.
Next, we present a semi-automated workflow that extends the building
reconstruction pipeline to include procedural context generation (terrain and
vegetation) using Unreal Engine and, finally, the integration of various types
of large-scale urban analysis data for visualization. We conclude with a series
of challenges faced in achieving such pipelines and the limitations of the
current approach. The steps for a complete, end-to-end solution involve
developing robust systems for building detection, rooftop recognition, and
geometry generation and importing and visualizing data in the same 3D
environment.
