Title: Floquet theory and computational method for the optical absorption of
laser-dressed solids
Authors: Vishal Tiwari, Bing Gu, Ignacio Franco
ID: 2305.09808
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.09808

Abstract:
Recent advances in laser technology now enable engineering the electronic
structure of matter through strong light-matter interactions. However, the
effective physicochemical properties of these laser-dressed nonequilibrium
materials are not well understood. Here we develop a general theory that now
enables modeling and interpreting the linear optical absorption of solids that
are dressed by light of arbitrary strength and photon energy. The theory applies
to any crystalline solid and quantum materials. In the theory, the dressing of
Bloch electrons by the driving laser is treated exactly using Floquet theory.
The effective optical properties of this laser-dressed material are probed
through a weak laser whose effects are captured to first order in perturbation
theory. Remarkably, in this nonequilibrium system the time- and space-periodic
Floquet-Bloch modes play the role of the pristine eigenstates of matter as the
optical absorption is seen to emerge from transitions among them. We implement
the theoretical framework into a code FloqticS: Floquet optics in Solids)
available through Github. To isolate the emergent phenomenology, we performed
computations in a model solid with a cosine-shaped lattice potential driven by
strong nonresonant light. The computations recover the dynamical Franz-Keldysh
effect and identify novel dramatic changes in the optical absorption upon
increasing the amplitude of the driving laser. The Floquet replicas open
absorption sidebands separated by integer multiples of the drive photon energy.
The hybridization of the Floquet-Bloch modes, create intense low-frequency
absorption and stimulated emissions, and dips in the absorption spectrum. We
assign these emerging effects as purely-optical tell-tale signatures of the
Floquet-Bloch modes. These advances can be used to model, control and
characterize the response properties of laser-dressed materials.
