Title: Unlocking the Use of Raw Multispectral Earth Observation Imagery for
Onboard Artificial Intelligence
Authors: Gabriele Meoni, Roberto Del Prete, Federico Serva, Alix De Beussche,
Olivier Colin, Nicolas Longépé
ID: 2305.11891
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.11891

Abstract:
Nowadays, there is growing interest in applying Artificial Intelligence (AI) on
board Earth Observation (EO) satellites for time-critical applications, such as
natural disaster response. However, the unavailability of raw satellite data
currently hinders research on lightweight pre-processing techniques and limits
the exploration of end-to-end pipelines, which could offer more efficient and
accurate extraction of insights directly from the source data. To fill this gap,
this work presents a novel methodology to automate the creation of datasets for
the detection of target events (e.g., warm thermal hotspots) or objects (e.g.,
vessels) from Sentinel-2 raw data and other multispectral EO pushbroom raw
imagery. The presented approach first processes the raw data by applying a
pipeline consisting of spatial band registration and georeferencing of the raw
data pixels. Then, it detects the target events by leveraging event-specific
state-of-the-art algorithms on the Level-1C products, which are mosaicked and
cropped on the georeferenced correspondent raw granule area. The detected events
are finally re-projected back onto the corresponding raw images. We apply the
proposed methodology to realize THRawS (Thermal Hotspots in Raw Sentinel-2
data), the first dataset of Sentinel-2 raw data containing warm thermal
hotspots. THRawS includes 1090 samples containing wildfires, volcanic eruptions,
and 33,335 event-free acquisitions to enable thermal hotspot detection and
general classification applications. This dataset and associated toolkits
provide the community with both an immediately useful resource as well as a
framework and methodology acting as a template for future additions. With this
work, we hope to pave the way for research on energy-efficient pre-processing
algorithms and AI-based end-to-end processing systems on board EO satellites.
