Title: Continual Learning through Human-Robot Interaction: Human Perceptions of
a Continual Learning Robot in Repeated Interactions
Authors: Ali Ayub, Zachary De Francesco, Patrick Holthaus, Chrystopher L.
Nehaniv, Kerstin Dautenhahn
ID: 2305.16332
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16332

Abstract:
For long-term deployment in dynamic real-world environments, assistive robots
must continue to learn and adapt to their environments. Researchers have
developed various computational models for continual learning (CL) that can
allow robots to continually learn from limited training data, and avoid
forgetting previous knowledge. While these CL models can mitigate forgetting on
static, systematically collected datasets, it is unclear how human users might
perceive a robot that continually learns over multiple interactions with them.
In this paper, we developed a system that integrates CL models for object
recognition with a Fetch mobile manipulator robot and allows human participants
to directly teach and test the robot over multiple sessions. We conducted an in-
person study with 60 participants that interacted with our system in 300
sessions (5 sessions per participant). We conducted a between-subject study with
three different CL models to understand human perceptions of continual learning
robots over multiple sessions. Our results suggest that participants'
perceptions of trust, competence, and usability of a continual learning robot
significantly decrease over multiple sessions if the robot forgets previously
learned objects. However, the perceived task load on participants for teaching
and testing the robot remains the same over multiple sessions even if the robot
forgets previously learned objects. Our results also indicate that state-of-the-
art CL models might perform unreliably when applied on robots interacting with
human participants. Further, continual learning robots are not perceived as very
trustworthy or competent by human participants, regardless of the underlying
continual learning model or the session number.
