Title: Communication quality in extreme environments affects performance of
astronauts and their support teams through increases in workload: Insights from
the AMADEE-20 analog Mars mission
Authors: Vera Hagemann, Lara Watermann, Florian Klonek, Christiane Heinicke
ID: 2305.15415
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15415

Abstract:
Astronaut crews and ground control support teams are highly interdependent teams
that need to communicate effectively to achieve a safe mission - despite being
separated by large distances. Team communication quality with its facets clarity
of objectives and information flow is a key coordination process to achieve high
team performance and task satisfaction. Especially in interdependent teams
working in extreme environments with time-delayed communications, the team's
success depends on effective communication. We hypothesized that communication
quality affects two key team outcomes, performance and task satisfaction, and
that these effects can be explained by increased workload (effort and
frustration). Hypotheses were tested during the AMADEE-20 analog Mars mission of
the Austrian Space Forum. The analog astronauts (AA) were supported by an On-
Site-Support (OSS) team and a remote Mission-Support-Centre (MSC) team. The MSC
was the only contact for both AA and OSS, and the communication between them had
a one-way delay of 10 minutes. Our study consisted of three runs in which
members of each team had to exchange information to solve an interdependent
task. We measured communication quality, effort and frustration, task
satisfaction, and team performance. Results show that clarity of objectives and
information flow positively impacted multiteam system performance. Furthermore,
clarity of objectives reduced experienced effort which in turn enhanced team
performance. High levels of information flow reduced experienced frustration, in
turn enhancing task satisfaction. Our findings show that these facets of
communication quality are essential for multiteam systems that work separated
from each other. We stress that specific (team) communication training for
astronauts and support personnel will be key to effective teamwork during future
Mars missions, and thus to overall mission success.
