Title: Late-Binding Scholarship in the Age of AI: Navigating Legal and Normative
Challenges of a New Form of Knowledge Production
Authors: Bill Tomlinson, Andrew W. Torrance, Rebecca W. Black, Donald J.
Patterson
ID: 2305.11058
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.11058

Abstract:
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is poised to enable a new leap in the creation of
scholarly content. New forms of engagement with AI systems, such as
collaborations with large language models like GPT-3, offer affordances that
will change the nature of both the scholarly process and the artifacts it
produces. This article articulates ways in which those artifacts can be written,
distributed, read, organized, and stored that are more dynamic, and potentially
more effective, than current academic practices. Specifically, rather than the
current "early-binding" process (that is, one in which ideas are fully reduced
to a final written form before they leave an author's desk), we propose that
there are substantial benefits to a "late-binding" process, in which ideas are
written dynamically at the moment of reading. In fact, the paradigm of "binding"
knowledge may transition to a new model in which scholarship remains ever
"unbound" and evolving. An alternative form for a scholarly work could be
encapsulated via several key components: a text abstract of the work's core
arguments; hyperlinks to a bibliography of relevant related work; novel data
that had been collected and metadata describing those data; algorithms or
processes necessary for analyzing those data; a reference to a particular AI
model that would serve as a "renderer" of the canonical version of the text; and
specified parameters that would allow for a precise, word-for-word
reconstruction of the canonical version. Such a form would enable both the
rendering of the canonical version, and also the possibility of dynamic AI
reimaginings of the text in light of future findings, scholarship unknown to the
original authors, alternative theories, and precise tailoring to specific
audiences (e.g., children, adults, professionals, amateurs).
