Title: Post-Quantum Hybrid Digital Signatures with Hardware-Support for Digital
Twins
Authors: Saif E. Nouma, Attila A. Yavuz
ID: 2305.12298
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.12298

Abstract:
Digital Twins (DT) virtually model cyber-physical objects using Internet of
Things (IoT) components (e.g., sensors) to gather and process senstive
information stored in the cloud. Trustworthiness of the streamed data is crucial
which requires quantum safety and breach resiliency. Digital signatures are
essential for scalable authentication and non-repudiation. Yet, NIST PQC
signature standards are exorbitantly costly for low-end IoT without considering
forward security. Moreover, Post-Quantum (PQ) signatures lack aggregation, which
is highly desirable to reduce the transmission and storage burdens in DTs.
Hence, there is an urgent need for lightweight digital signatures that offer
compromise resiliency and compactness while permitting an effective transition
into the PQ era for DTs.
  We create a series of highly lightweight digital signatures called Hardware-
ASsisted Efficient Signature (HASES) that meets the above requirements. The core
of HASES is a hardware-assisted cryptographic commitment construct oracle (CCO)
that permits verifiers to obtain expensive commitments without signer
interaction. We created three HASES schemes: PQ-HASES is a forward-secure PQ
signature, LA-HASES is an efficient aggregate Elliptic-Curve signature, and HY-
HASES is a novel hybrid scheme that combines PQ-HASES and LA-HASES with novel
strong nesting and sequential aggregation. HASES does not require a secure-
hardware on the signer. We proved that HASES schemes are secure and implemented
them on commodity hardware and an 8-bit AVR ATmega2560. Our experiments confirm
that PQ-HASES and LA-HASES are two magnitudes of times more signer efficient
than their PQ and conventional-secure counterparts, respectively. HY-HASES
outperforms NIST PQC and conventional signature combinations, offering a
standardcompliant transitional solution for emerging DTs. We open-source HASES
schemes for public testing and adaptation.
