Title: Transferability of coVariance Neural Networks and Application to
Interpretable Brain Age Prediction using Anatomical Features
Authors: Saurabh Sihag, Gonzalo Mateos, Corey T. McMillan, Alejandro Ribeiro
ID: 2305.01807
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.01807

Abstract:
Graph convolutional networks (GCN) leverage topology-driven graph convolutional
operations to combine information across the graph for inference tasks. In our
recent work, we have studied GCNs with covariance matrices as graphs in the form
of coVariance neural networks (VNNs) that draw similarities with traditional
PCA-driven data analysis approaches while offering significant advantages over
them. In this paper, we first focus on theoretically characterizing the
transferability of VNNs. The notion of transferability is motivated from the
intuitive expectation that learning models could generalize to "compatible"
datasets (possibly of different dimensionalities) with minimal effort. VNNs
inherit the scale-free data processing architecture from GCNs and here, we show
that VNNs exhibit transferability of performance over datasets whose covariance
matrices converge to a limit object. Multi-scale neuroimaging datasets enable
the study of the brain at multiple scales and hence, can validate the
theoretical results on the transferability of VNNs. To gauge the advantages
offered by VNNs in neuroimaging data analysis, we focus on the task of "brain
age" prediction using cortical thickness features. In clinical neuroscience,
there has been an increased interest in machine learning algorithms which
provide estimates of "brain age" that deviate from chronological age. We
leverage the architecture of VNNs to extend beyond the coarse metric of brain
age gap in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and make two important observations: (i)
VNNs can assign anatomical interpretability to elevated brain age gap in AD, and
(ii) the interpretability offered by VNNs is contingent on their ability to
exploit specific principal components of the anatomical covariance matrix. We
further leverage the transferability of VNNs to cross validate the above
observations across different datasets.
