Title: A Survey of Blockchain and Artificial Intelligence for 6G Wireless
Communications
Authors: Yiping Zuo, Jiajia Guo, Ning Gao, Yongxu Zhu, Shi Jin, Xiao Li
ID: 2305.08604
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.08604

Abstract:
The research on the sixth-generation (6G) wireless communications for the
development of future mobile communication networks has been officially launched
around the world. 6G networks face multifarious challenges, such as resource-
constrained mobile devices, difficult wireless resource management, high
complexity of heterogeneous network architectures, explosive computing and
storage requirements, privacy and security threats. To address these challenges,
deploying blockchain and artificial intelligence (AI) in 6G networks may realize
new breakthroughs in advancing network performances in terms of security,
privacy, efficiency, cost, and more. In this paper, we provide a detailed survey
of existing works on the application of blockchain and AI to 6G wireless
communications. More specifically, we start with a brief overview of blockchain
and AI. Then, we mainly review the recent advances in the fusion of blockchain
and AI, and highlight the inevitable trend of deploying both blockchain and AI
in wireless communications. Furthermore, we extensively explore integrating
blockchain and AI for wireless communication systems, involving secure services
and Internet of Things (IoT) smart applications. Particularly, some of the most
talked-about key services based on blockchain and AI are introduced, such as
spectrum management, computation allocation, content caching, and security and
privacy. Moreover, we also focus on some important IoT smart applications
supported by blockchain and AI, covering smart healthcare, smart transportation,
smart grid, and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). We also analyze the open issues
and research challenges for the joint deployment of blockchain and AI in 6G
wireless communications. Lastly, based on lots of existing meaningful works,
this paper aims to provide a comprehensive survey of blockchain and AI in 6G
networks.
