Title: Machine Learning and VIIRS Satellite Retrievals for Skillful Fuel
Moisture Content Monitoring in Wildfire Management
Authors: John S. Schreck, William Petzke, Pedro A. Jimenez, Thomas Brummet,
Jason C. Knievel, Eric James, Branko Kosovic, David John Gagne
ID: 2305.11910
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.11910

Abstract:
Monitoring the fuel moisture content (FMC) of vegetation is crucial for managing
and mitigating the impact of wildland fires. The combination of in situ FMC
observations with numerical weather prediction (NWP) models and satellite
retrievals has enabled the development of machine learning (ML) models to
estimate dead FMC retrievals over the contiguous US (CONUS). In this study, ML
models were trained using variables from the National Water Model and the High-
Resolution Rapid Refresh (HRRR) NWP models, and static variables characterizing
the surface properties, as well as surface reflectances and land surface
temperature (LST) retrievals from the VIIRS instrument on board the Suomi-NPP
satellite system. Extensive hyper-parameter optimization yielded skillful FMC
models compared to a daily climatography RMSE (+44\%) and to an hourly
climatography RMSE (+24\%). Furthermore, VIIRS retrievals were important
predictors for estimating FMC, contributing significantly as a group due to
their high band-correlation. In contrast, individual predictors in the HRRR
group had relatively high importance according to the explainability techniques
used. When both HRRR and VIIRS retrievals were not used as model inputs, the
performance dropped significantly. If VIIRS retrievals were not used, the RMSE
performance was worse. This highlights the importance of VIIRS retrievals in
modeling FMC, which yielded better models compared to MODIS. Overall, the
importance of the VIIRS group of predictors corroborates the dynamic
relationship between the 10-h fuel and the atmosphere and soil moisture. These
findings emphasize the significance of selecting appropriate data sources for
predicting FMC with ML models, with VIIRS retrievals and selected HRRR variables
being critical components in producing skillful FMC estimates.
