Title: Blockchain Transaction Fee Forecasting: A Comparison of Machine Learning
Methods
Authors: Conall Butler, Martin Crane
ID: 2305.08105
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.08105

Abstract:
Gas is the transaction-fee metering system of the Ethereum network. Users of the
network are required to select a gas price for submission with their
transaction, creating a risk of overpaying or delayed/unprocessed transactions
in this selection. In this work, we investigate data in the aftermath of the
London Hard Fork and shed insight into the transaction dynamics of the net-work
after this major fork. As such, this paper provides an update on work previous
to 2019 on the link between EthUSD BitUSD and gas price. For forecasting, we
compare a novel combination of machine learning methods such as Direct Recursive
Hybrid LSTM, CNNLSTM, and Attention LSTM. These are combined with wavelet
threshold denoising and matrix profile data processing toward the forecasting of
block minimum gas price, on a 5-min timescale, over multiple lookaheads. As the
first application of the matrix profile being applied to gas price data and
forecasting we are aware of, this study demonstrates that matrix profile data
can enhance attention-based models however, given the hardware constraints,
hybrid models outperformed attention and CNNLSTM models. The wavelet coherence
of inputs demonstrates correlation in multiple variables on a 1 day timescale,
which is a deviation of base free from gas price. A Direct-Recursive Hybrid LSTM
strategy outperforms other models. Hybrid models have favourable performance up
to a 20 min lookahead with performance being comparable to attention models when
forecasting 25/50-min ahead. Forecasts over a range of lookaheads allow users to
make an informed decision on gas price selection and the optimal window to
submit their transaction in without fear of their transaction being rejected.
This, in turn, gives more detailed insight into gas price dynamics than existing
recommenders, oracles and forecasting approaches, which provide simple
heuristics or limited lookahead horizons.
