Title: Analysing high resolution digital Mars images using machine learning
Authors: Mira Gergácz, Ákos Kereszturi
ID: 2305.19958
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.19958

Abstract:
The search for ephemeral liquid water on Mars is an ongoing activity. After the
recession of the seasonal polar ice cap on Mars, small water ice patches may be
left behind in shady places due to the low thermal conductivity of the Martian
surface and atmosphere. During late spring and early summer, these patches may
be exposed to direct sunlight and warm up rapidly enough for the liquid phase to
emerge. To see the spatial and temporal occurrence of such ice patches, optical
images should be searched for and checked. Previously a manual image analysis
was conducted on 110 images from the southern hemisphere, captured by the High
Resolution Imaging Science Experiment (HiRISE) camera onboard the Mars
Reconnaissance Orbiter space mission. Out of these, 37 images were identified
with smaller ice patches, which were distinguishable by their brightness, colour
and strong connection to local topographic shading. In this study, a
convolutional neural network (CNN) is applied to find further images with
potential water ice patches in the latitude band between -40° and -60°, where
the seasonal retreat of the polar ice cap happens. Previously analysed HiRISE
images were used to train the model, where each image was split into hundreds of
pieces (chunks), expanding the training dataset to 6240 images. A test run
conducted on 38 new HiRISE images indicates that the program can generally
recognise small bright patches, however further training might be needed for
more precise identification. This further training has been conducted now,
incorporating the results of the previous test run. To retrain the model, 18646
chunks were analysed and 48 additional epochs were ran. In the end the model
produced a 94% accuracy in recognising ice, 58% of these images showed small
enough ice patches on them. The rest of the images was covered by too much ice
or showed CO2 ice sublimation in some places.
