Title: RoSETZ: Roman Survey of the Earth Transit Zone -- a SETI-optimized survey
for habitable-zone exoplanets
Authors: Eamonn Kerins, Supachai Awiphan, Kathryn Edmondson, Michael Garrett,
Jacob Haqq-Misra, Rene Heller, Macy Huston, David Kipping, Ravi Kopparapu, Danny
C. Price, Andrew Siemion, Siddhant Sharma Evan L. Sneed, Hector Socas-Navarro,
Robert F. Wilson, Jason Wright
ID: 2306.10202
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.10202

Abstract:
In this White Paper for Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope (Roman) science, we
propose the Roman Survey of the Earth Transit Zone (RoSETZ), a transit search
for rocky planets within the habitable zones (HZs) of stars located within the
Earth Transit Zone (ETZ). The ETZ holds special interest in the search for
extra-terrestrial intelligence (SETI) - observers on planets within the ETZ can
see Earth as a transiting planet. RoSETZ would augment the Roman Galactic Bulge
Time Domain Survey (GBTDS) as an additional field located $\sim 5$~degrees away
from other GBTDS fields. Our simulations show that RoSETZ alone can find from
120 to 630 Earth-sized HZ planets around K- and M-type hosts, with the range
reflecting different survey design assumptions. These yields are 5-20 times the
number currently known. Such a sample will transform our knowledge of ``Eta-
Earth'' ($η_{\oplus}$) -- the occurrence of Earth-sized HZ planets -- and would
be the first catalogue of exoplanets selected in a manner optimized according to
the Mutual Detectability targetted-SETI strategy. If it can be accommodated
alongside the existing GBTDS design, we favour a RoSETZ-Max design that is
observed for the duration of the GBTDS. If not, we show that a slimmed-down
RoSETZ-Lite design, occupying two GBTDS seasons, would not significantly impact
overall GBTDS exoplanet yields, even if time allocated to it had to come from
time allocations to other fields. We argue that the angular separation of RoSETZ
from other GBTDS fields permits self-calibration of systematic uncertainties
that would otherwise hamper exoplanet demographic modelling of both microlensing
and transit datasets. Other science possible with RoSETZ data include studies of
small solar system bodies and high resolution 3D extinction mapping.
