Title: Intersectionality in Conversational AI Safety: How Bayesian Multilevel
Models Help Understand Diverse Perceptions of Safety
Authors: Christopher M. Homan, Greg Serapio-Garcia, Lora Aroyo, Mark Diaz,
Alicia Parrish, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Alex S. Taylor, Ding Wang
ID: 2306.11530
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.11530

Abstract:
Conversational AI systems exhibit a level of human-like behavior that promises
to have profound impacts on many aspects of daily life -- how people access
information, create content, and seek social support. Yet these models have also
shown a propensity for biases, offensive language, and conveying false
information. Consequently, understanding and moderating safety risks in these
models is a critical technical and social challenge. Perception of safety is
intrinsically subjective, where many factors -- often intersecting -- could
determine why one person may consider a conversation with a chatbot safe and
another person could consider the same conversation unsafe. In this work, we
focus on demographic factors that could influence such diverse perceptions. To
this end, we contribute an analysis using Bayesian multilevel modeling to
explore the connection between rater demographics and how raters report safety
of conversational AI systems. We study a sample of 252 human raters stratified
by gender, age group, race/ethnicity group, and locale. This rater pool provided
safety labels for 1,340 human-chatbot conversations. Our results show that
intersectional effects involving demographic characteristics such as
race/ethnicity, gender, and age, as well as content characteristics, such as
degree of harm, all play significant roles in determining the safety of
conversational AI systems. For example, race/ethnicity and gender show strong
intersectional effects, particularly among South Asian and East Asian women. We
also find that conversational degree of harm impacts raters of all
race/ethnicity groups, but that Indigenous and South Asian raters are
particularly sensitive to this harm. Finally, we observe the effect of education
is uniquely intersectional for Indigenous raters, highlighting the utility of
multilevel frameworks for uncovering underrepresented social perspectives.
