Title: FLAMINGO: Calibrating large cosmological hydrodynamical simulations with
machine learning
Authors: Roi Kugel, Joop Schaye, Matthieu Schaller, John C. Helly, Joey
Braspenning, Willem Elbers, Carlos S. Frenk, Ian G. McCarthy, Juliana Kwan,
Jaime Salcido, Marcel P. van Daalen, Bert Vandenbroucke, Yannick M. Bahé, Josh
Borrow, Evgenii Chaikin, Filip Huško, Adrian Jenkins, Cedric G. Lacey, Folkert
S. J. Nobels, Ian Vernon
ID: 2306.05492
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.05492

Abstract:
To fully take advantage of the data provided by large-scale structure surveys,
we need to quantify the potential impact of baryonic effects, such as feedback
from active galactic nuclei (AGN) and star formation, on cosmological
observables. In simulations, feedback processes originate on scales that remain
unresolved. Therefore, they need to be sourced via subgrid models that contain
free parameters. We use machine learning to calibrate the AGN and stellar
feedback models for the FLAMINGO cosmological hydrodynamical simulations. Using
Gaussian process emulators trained on Latin hypercubes of 32 smaller-volume
simulations, we model how the galaxy stellar mass function and cluster gas
fractions change as a function of the subgrid parameters. The emulators are then
fit to observational data, allowing for the inclusion of potential observational
biases. We apply our method to the three different FLAMINGO resolutions,
spanning a factor of 64 in particle mass, recovering the observed relations
within the respective resolved mass ranges. We also use the emulators, which
link changes in subgrid parameters to changes in observables, to find models
that skirt or exceed the observationally allowed range for cluster gas fractions
and the stellar mass function. Our method enables us to define model variations
in terms of the data that they are calibrated to rather than the values of
specific subgrid parameters. This approach is useful, because subgrid parameters
are typically not directly linked to particular observables, and predictions for
a specific observable are influenced by multiple subgrid parameters.
