Title: Surfer: Progressive Reasoning with World Models for Robotic Manipulation
Authors: Pengzhen Ren, Kaidong Zhang, Hetao Zheng, Zixuan Li, Yuhang Wen, Fengda
Zhu, Mas Ma, Xiaodan Liang
ID: 2306.11335
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.11335

Abstract:
Considering how to make the model accurately understand and follow natural
language instructions and perform actions consistent with world knowledge is a
key challenge in robot manipulation. This mainly includes human fuzzy
instruction reasoning and the following of physical knowledge. Therefore, the
embodied intelligence agent must have the ability to model world knowledge from
training data. However, most existing vision and language robot manipulation
methods mainly operate in less realistic simulator and language settings and
lack explicit modeling of world knowledge. To bridge this gap, we introduce a
novel and simple robot manipulation framework, called Surfer. It is based on the
world model, treats robot manipulation as a state transfer of the visual scene,
and decouples it into two parts: action and scene. Then, the generalization
ability of the model on new instructions and new scenes is enhanced by explicit
modeling of the action and scene prediction in multi-modal information. In
addition to the framework, we also built a robot manipulation simulator that
supports full physics execution based on the MuJoCo physics engine. It can
automatically generate demonstration training data and test data, effectively
reducing labor costs. To conduct a comprehensive and systematic evaluation of
the robot manipulation model in terms of language understanding and physical
execution, we also created a robotic manipulation benchmark with progressive
reasoning tasks, called SeaWave. It contains 4 levels of progressive reasoning
tasks and can provide a standardized testing platform for embedded AI agents in
multi-modal environments. On average, Surfer achieved a success rate of 54.74%
on the defined four levels of manipulation tasks, exceeding the best baseline
performance of 47.64%.
