Title: Statutory Professions in AI governance and their consequences for
explainable AI
Authors: Labhaoise NiFhaolain, Andrew Hines, Vivek Nallur
ID: 2306.08959
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.08959

Abstract:
Intentional and accidental harms arising from the use of AI have impacted the
health, safety and rights of individuals. While regulatory frameworks are being
developed, there remains a lack of consensus on methods necessary to deliver
safe AI. The potential for explainable AI (XAI) to contribute to the
effectiveness of the regulation of AI is being increasingly examined. Regulation
must include methods to ensure compliance on an ongoing basis, though there is
an absence of practical proposals on how to achieve this. For XAI to be
successfully incorporated into a regulatory system, the individuals who are
engaged in interpreting/explaining the model to stakeholders should be
sufficiently qualified for the role. Statutory professionals are prevalent in
domains in which harm can be done to the health, safety and rights of
individuals. The most obvious examples are doctors, engineers and lawyers. Those
professionals are required to exercise skill and judgement and to defend their
decision making process in the event of harm occurring. We propose that a
statutory profession framework be introduced as a necessary part of the AI
regulatory framework for compliance and monitoring purposes. We will refer to
this new statutory professional as an AI Architect (AIA). This AIA would be
responsible to ensure the risk of harm is minimised and accountable in the event
that harms occur. The AIA would also be relied on to provide appropriate
interpretations/explanations of XAI models to stakeholders. Further, in order to
satisfy themselves that the models have been developed in a satisfactory manner,
the AIA would require models to have appropriate transparency. Therefore it is
likely that the introduction of an AIA system would lead to an increase in the
use of XAI to enable AIA to discharge their professional obligations.
