Title: ProcessGPT: Transforming Business Process Management with Generative
Artificial Intelligence
Authors: Amin Beheshti, Jian Yang, Quan Z. Sheng, Boualem Benatallah, Fabio
Casati, Schahram Dustdar, Hamid Reza Motahari Nezhad, Xuyun Zhang, Shan Xue
ID: 2306.01771
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.01771

Abstract:
Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT) is a state-of-the-art machine learning
model capable of generating human-like text through natural language processing
(NLP). GPT is trained on massive amounts of text data and uses deep learning
techniques to learn patterns and relationships within the data, enabling it to
generate coherent and contextually appropriate text. This position paper
proposes using GPT technology to generate new process models when/if needed. We
introduce ProcessGPT as a new technology that has the potential to enhance
decision-making in data-centric and knowledge-intensive processes. ProcessGPT
can be designed by training a generative pre-trained transformer model on a
large dataset of business process data. This model can then be fine-tuned on
specific process domains and trained to generate process flows and make
decisions based on context and user input. The model can be integrated with NLP
and machine learning techniques to provide insights and recommendations for
process improvement. Furthermore, the model can automate repetitive tasks and
improve process efficiency while enabling knowledge workers to communicate
analysis findings, supporting evidence, and make decisions. ProcessGPT can
revolutionize business process management (BPM) by offering a powerful tool for
process augmentation, automation and improvement. Finally, we demonstrate how
ProcessGPT can be a powerful tool for augmenting data engineers in maintaining
data ecosystem processes within large bank organizations. Our scenario
highlights the potential of this approach to improve efficiency, reduce costs,
and enhance the quality of business operations through the automation of data-
centric and knowledge-intensive processes. These results underscore the promise
of ProcessGPT as a transformative technology for organizations looking to
improve their process workflows.
