Title: A VERITAS/Breakthrough Listen Search for Optical Technosignatures
Authors: Atreya Acharyya, Colin Adams, Avery Archer, Priyadarshini Bangale,
Pedro Batista, Wystan Benbow, Aryeh Brill, M Capasso, Manel Errando, Abraham
Falcone, Qi Feng, John Finley, Gregory Foote, Lucy Fortson, Amy Furniss, Sean
Griffin, William Hanlon, David Hanna, Olivier Hervet, Claire Hinrichs, John
Hoang, Jamie Holder, T. Humensky, Weidong Jin, Philip Kaaret, Mary P. Kertzman,
Maria Kherlakian, David Kieda, Tobias Kleiner, Nikolas Korzoun, Sajan Kumar,
Mark Lang, Matthew Lundy, Gernot Maier, Conor McGrath, Matthew Millard, Hayden
Miller, John Millis, Connor Mooney, Patrick Moriarty, Reshmi Mukherjee, Stephan
O'Brien, Rene A. Ong, Martin Pohl, Elisa Pueschel, John Quinn, Kenneth J. Ragan,
Paul Reynolds, Deivid Ribeiro, Emmet Thomas Roache, Jamie Ryan, Iftach Sadeh,
Lab Saha, Marcos Santander, Glenn H Sembroski, Ruo Shang, Donggeun Tak, Anjana
Talluri, James Tucci, Nico Vazquez, David Williams, Sam Wong, Jooyun Woo, David
DeBoer, Howard Isaacson, Imke de Pater, Danny Price, Andrew Siemion
ID: 2306.17680
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.17680

Abstract:
The Breakthrough Listen Initiative is conducting a program using multiple
telescopes around the world to search for "technosignatures": artificial
transmitters of extraterrestrial origin from beyond our solar system. The
VERITAS Collaboration joined this program in 2018, and provides the capability
to search for one particular technosignature: optical pulses of a few
nanoseconds duration detectable over interstellar distances. We report here on
the analysis and results of dedicated VERITAS observations of Breakthrough
Listen targets conducted in 2019 and 2020 and of archival VERITAS data collected
since 2012. Thirty hours of dedicated observations of 136 targets and 249
archival observations of 140 targets were analyzed and did not reveal any
signals consistent with a technosignature. The results are used to place limits
on the fraction of stars hosting transmitting civilizations. We also discuss the
minimum-pulse sensitivity of our observations and present VERITAS observations
of CALIOP: a space-based pulsed laser onboard the CALIPSO satellite. The
detection of these pulses with VERITAS, using the analysis techniques developed
for our technosignature search, allows a test of our analysis efficiency and
serves as an important proof-of-principle.
