Title: From entropy to gravitational entropy
Authors: Sarbari Guha
ID: 2306.04172
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.04172

Abstract:
The concept of entropy forms the backbone of the principles of thermodynamics.
R.C. Tolman initiated the correlation between gravity and thermodynamics. The
development of black hole thermodynamics and the generalized second law of
thermodynamics led to Penrose's conjecture that the Weyl tensor should serve as
a measure of the entropy of the free gravitational field. This entropy, known as
gravitational entropy, reflects the degrees of freedom of the free gravitational
field. The proposition of gravitational entropy provides a justification for the
low entropy of the initial Universe. It was necessary to associate an entropy
function with the free gravitational field even at the time of the big bang, so
that a gravity-dominated evolution of the Universe may preserve the second law
of thermodynamics. It also places the concept of black hole entropy in a proper
context, which appears as a special case of gravitational entropy. However, a
self-consistent notion of gravitational entropy has eluded us till today.
Various proposals have been put forward, initially based on Penrose's Weyl
Curvature Hypothesis, and subsequently modified to fit the needs of specific
geometries and matter distributions. Such proposals were basically geometric in
nature. A decade back a new definition of gravitational entropy was proposed
from the considerations of the relativistic Gibbs equation and based on the
square root of the Bel-Robinson tensor. However, even this proposal is valid
only for a restricted class of spacetimes. A complete description of
gravitational entropy encompassing black hole physics and cosmological dynamics
is yet to emerge. In this article, we will try to gather an overview of the
concept of gravitational entropy beginning with the initial attempts to
correlate gravity with thermodynamics and follow it up with the development of
the various proposals of gravitational entropy.
