Title: Towards a robust and reliable deep learning approach for detection of
compact binary mergers in gravitational wave data
Authors: Shreejit Jadhav, Mihir Shrivastava, Sanjit Mitra
ID: 2306.11797
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.11797

Abstract:
The ability of deep learning (DL) approaches to learn generalised signal and
noise models, coupled with their fast inference on GPUs, holds great promise for
enhancing gravitational-wave (GW) searches in terms of speed, parameter space
coverage, and search sensitivity. However, the opaque nature of DL models
severely harms their reliability. In this work, we meticulously develop a DL
model stage-wise and work towards improving its robustness and reliability.
First, we address the problems in maintaining the purity of training data by
deriving a new metric that better reflects the visual strength of the 'chirp'
signal features in the data. Using a reduced, smooth representation obtained
through a variational auto-encoder (VAE), we build a classifier to search for
compact binary coalescence (CBC) signals. Our tests on real LIGO data show an
impressive performance of the model. However, upon probing the robustness of the
model through adversarial attacks, its simple failure modes were identified,
underlining how such models can still be highly fragile. As a first step towards
bringing robustness, we retrain the model in a novel framework involving a
generative adversarial network (GAN). Over the course of training, the model
learns to eliminate the primary modes of failure identified by the adversaries.
Although absolute robustness is practically impossible to achieve, we
demonstrate some fundamental improvements earned through such training, like
sparseness and reduced degeneracy in the extracted features at different layers
inside the model. We show that these gains are achieved at practically zero loss
in terms of model performance on real LIGO data before and after GAN training.
Through a direct search on 8.8 days of LIGO data, we recover two significant CBC
events from GWTC-2.1, GW190519_153544 and GW190521_074359. We also report the
search sensitivity obtained from an injection study.
