Title: Female mosquito detection by means of AI techniques inside release
containers in the context of a Sterile Insect Technique program
Authors: Javier Naranjo-Alcazar, Jordi Grau-Haro, David Almenar, Pedro
Zuccarello
ID: 2306.10843
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.10843

Abstract:
The Sterile Insect Technique (SIT) is a biological pest control technique based
on the release into the environment of sterile males of the insect species whose
population is to be controlled. The entire SIT process involves mass-rearing
within a biofactory, sorting of the specimens by sex, sterilization, and
subsequent release of the sterile males into the environment. The reason for
avoiding the release of female specimens is because, unlike males, females bite,
with the subsequent risk of disease transmission. In the case of Aedes mosquito
biofactories for SIT, the key point of the whole process is sex separation. This
process is nowadays performed by a combination of mechanical devices and AI-
based vision systems. However, there is still a possibility of false negatives,
so a last stage of verification is necessary before releasing them into the
environment. It is known that the sound produced by the flapping of adult male
mosquitoes is different from that produced by females, so this feature can be
used to detect the presence of females in containers prior to environmental
release. This paper presents a study for the detection of females in Aedes
mosquito release vessels for SIT programs. The containers used consist of PVC a
tubular design of 8.8cm diameter and 12.5cm height. The containers were placed
in an experimental setup that allowed the recording of the sound of mosquito
flight inside of them. Each container was filled with 250 specimens considering
the cases of (i) only male mosquitoes, (ii) only female mosquitoes, and (iii)
75% males and 25% females. Case (i) was used for training and testing, whereas
cases (ii) and (iii) were used only for testing. Two algorithms were implemented
for the detection of female mosquitoes: an unsupervised outlier detection
algorithm (iForest) and a one-class SVM trained with male-only recordings.
