Title: Physics-inspired spatiotemporal-graph AI ensemble for the detection of
higher order wave mode signals of spinning binary black hole mergers
Authors: Minyang Tian, E. A. Huerta, Huihuo Zheng, Prayush Kumar
ID: 2306.15728
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.15728

Abstract:
We present a new class of AI models for the detection of quasi-circular,
spinning, non-precessing binary black hole mergers whose waveforms include the
higher order gravitational wave modes $(l, |m|)=\{(2, 2), (2, 1), (3, 3), (3,
2), (4, 4)\}$, and mode mixing effects in the $l = 3, |m| = 2$ harmonics. These
AI models combine hybrid dilated convolution neural networks to accurately model
both short- and long-range temporal sequential information of gravitational
waves; and graph neural networks to capture spatial correlations among
gravitational wave observatories to consistently describe and identify the
presence of a signal in a three detector network encompassing the Advanced LIGO
and Virgo detectors. We first trained these spatiotemporal-graph AI models using
synthetic noise, using 1.2 million modeled waveforms to densely sample this
signal manifold, within 1.7 hours using 256 A100 GPUs in the Polaris
supercomputer at the ALCF. Our distributed training approach had optimal
performance, and strong scaling up to 512 A100 GPUs. With these AI ensembles we
processed data from a three detector network, and found that an ensemble of 4 AI
models achieves state-of-the-art performance for signal detection, and reports
two misclassifications for every decade of searched data. We distributed AI
inference over 128 GPUs in the Polaris supercomputer and 128 nodes in the Theta
supercomputer, and completed the processing of a decade of gravitational wave
data from a three detector network within 3.5 hours. Finally, we fine-tuned
these AI ensembles to process the entire month of February 2020, which is part
of the O3b LIGO/Virgo observation run, and found 6 gravitational waves,
concurrently identified in Advanced LIGO and Advanced Virgo data, and zero false
positives. This analysis was completed in one hour using one A100 GPU.
