Title: Feasibility of performing quantum chemistry calculations on quantum
computers
Authors: Thibaud Louvet, Thomas Ayral, Xavier Waintal
ID: 2306.02620
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.02620

Abstract:
Quantum chemistry is envisioned as an early and disruptive application for
quantum computers. Yet, closer scrutiny of the proposed algorithms shows that
there are considerable difficulties along the way. Here, we propose two criteria
for evaluating two leading quantum approaches for finding the ground state of
molecules. The first criterion applies to the variational quantum eigensolver
(VQE) algorithm. It sets an upper bound to the level of imprecision/decoherence
that can be tolerated in quantum hardware as a function of the targeted
precision, the number of gates and the typical energy contribution from states
populated by decoherence processes. We find that decoherence is highly
detrimental to the accuracy of VQE and performing relevant chemistry
calculations would require performances that are expected for fault-tolerant
quantum computers, not mere noisy hardware, even with advanced error mitigation
techniques. Physically, the sensitivity of VQE to decoherence originates from
the fact that, in VQE, the spectrum of the studied molecule has no correlation
with the spectrum of the quantum hardware used to perform the computation.
  The second criterion applies to the quantum phase estimation (QPE) algorithm,
which is often presented as the go-to replacement of VQE upon availability of
(noiseless) fault-tolerant quantum computers. QPE requires an input state with a
large enough overlap with the sought-after ground state. We provide a criterion
to estimate quantitatively this overlap based on the energy and the energy
variance of said input state. Using input states from a variety of state-of-the-
art classical methods, we show that the scaling of this overlap with system size
does display the standard orthogonality catastrophe, namely an exponential
suppression with system size. This in turns leads to an exponentially reduced
QPE success probability.
