Title: Machine learning in and out of equilibrium
Authors: Shishir Adhikari, Alkan Kabakçıoğlu, Alexander Strang, Deniz Yuret,
Michael Hinczewski
ID: 2306.03521
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.03521

Abstract:
The algorithms used to train neural networks, like stochastic gradient descent
(SGD), have close parallels to natural processes that navigate a high-
dimensional parameter space -- for example protein folding or evolution. Our
study uses a Fokker-Planck approach, adapted from statistical physics, to
explore these parallels in a single, unified framework. We focus in particular
on the stationary state of the system in the long-time limit, which in
conventional SGD is out of equilibrium, exhibiting persistent currents in the
space of network parameters. As in its physical analogues, the current is
associated with an entropy production rate for any given training trajectory.
The stationary distribution of these rates obeys the integral and detailed
fluctuation theorems -- nonequilibrium generalizations of the second law of
thermodynamics. We validate these relations in two numerical examples, a
nonlinear regression network and MNIST digit classification. While the
fluctuation theorems are universal, there are other aspects of the stationary
state that are highly sensitive to the training details. Surprisingly, the
effective loss landscape and diffusion matrix that determine the shape of the
stationary distribution vary depending on the simple choice of minibatching done
with or without replacement. We can take advantage of this nonequilibrium
sensitivity to engineer an equilibrium stationary state for a particular
application: sampling from a posterior distribution of network weights in
Bayesian machine learning. We propose a new variation of stochastic gradient
Langevin dynamics (SGLD) that harnesses without replacement minibatching. In an
example system where the posterior is exactly known, this SGWORLD algorithm
outperforms SGLD, converging to the posterior orders of magnitude faster as a
function of the learning rate.
