Title: ArchGym: An Open-Source Gymnasium for Machine Learning Assisted
Architecture Design
Authors: Srivatsan Krishnan, Amir Yazdanbaksh, Shvetank Prakash, Jason Jabbour,
Ikechukwu Uchendu, Susobhan Ghosh, Behzad Boroujerdian, Daniel Richins,
Devashree Tripathy, Aleksandra Faust, Vijay Janapa Reddi
ID: 2306.08888
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.08888

Abstract:
Machine learning is a prevalent approach to tame the complexity of design space
exploration for domain-specific architectures. Using ML for design space
exploration poses challenges. First, it's not straightforward to identify the
suitable algorithm from an increasing pool of ML methods. Second, assessing the
trade-offs between performance and sample efficiency across these methods is
inconclusive. Finally, lack of a holistic framework for fair, reproducible, and
objective comparison across these methods hinders progress of adopting ML-aided
architecture design space exploration and impedes creating repeatable artifacts.
To mitigate these challenges, we introduce ArchGym, an open-source gym and easy-
to-extend framework that connects diverse search algorithms to architecture
simulators. To demonstrate utility, we evaluate ArchGym across multiple vanilla
and domain-specific search algorithms in designing custom memory controller,
deep neural network accelerators, and custom SoC for AR/VR workloads,
encompassing over 21K experiments. Results suggest that with unlimited samples,
ML algorithms are equally favorable to meet user-defined target specification if
hyperparameters are tuned; no solution is necessarily better than another (e.g.,
reinforcement learning vs. Bayesian methods). We coin the term hyperparameter
lottery to describe the chance for a search algorithm to find an optimal design
provided meticulously selected hyperparameters. The ease of data collection and
aggregation in ArchGym facilitates research in ML-aided architecture design
space exploration. As a case study, we show this advantage by developing a proxy
cost model with an RMSE of 0.61% that offers a 2,000-fold reduction in
simulation time. Code and data for ArchGym is available at
https://bit.ly/ArchGym.
