Title: MNISQ: A Large-Scale Quantum Circuit Dataset for Machine Learning on/for
Quantum Computers in the NISQ era
Authors: Leonardo Placidi, Ryuichiro Hataya, Toshio Mori, Koki Aoyama, Hayata
Morisaki, Kosuke Mitarai, Keisuke Fujii
ID: 2306.16627
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.16627

Abstract:
We introduce the first large-scale dataset, MNISQ, for both the Quantum and the
Classical Machine Learning community during the Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum
era. MNISQ consists of 4,950,000 data points organized in 9 subdatasets.
Building our dataset from the quantum encoding of classical information (e.g.,
MNIST dataset), we deliver a dataset in a dual form: in quantum form, as
circuits, and in classical form, as quantum circuit descriptions (quantum
programming language, QASM). In fact, also the Machine Learning research related
to quantum computers undertakes a dual challenge: enhancing machine learning
exploiting the power of quantum computers, while also leveraging state-of-the-
art classical machine learning methodologies to help the advancement of quantum
computing. Therefore, we perform circuit classification on our dataset, tackling
the task with both quantum and classical models. In the quantum endeavor, we
test our circuit dataset with Quantum Kernel methods, and we show excellent
results up to $97\%$ accuracy. In the classical world, the underlying quantum
mechanical structures within the quantum circuit data are not trivial.
Nevertheless, we test our dataset on three classical models: Structured State
Space sequence model (S4), Transformer and LSTM. In particular, the S4 model
applied on the tokenized QASM sequences reaches an impressive $77\%$ accuracy.
These findings illustrate that quantum circuit-related datasets are likely to be
quantum advantageous, but also that state-of-the-art machine learning
methodologies can competently classify and recognize quantum circuits. We
finally entrust the quantum and classical machine learning community the
fundamental challenge to build more quantum-classical datasets like ours and to
build future benchmarks from our experiments. The dataset is accessible on
GitHub and its circuits are easily run in qulacs or qiskit.
