Title: Targeted collapse regularized autoencoder for anomaly detection: black
hole at the center
Authors: Amin Ghafourian, Huanyi Shui, Devesh Upadhyay, Rajesh Gupta, Dimitar
Filev, Iman Soltani Bozchalooi
ID: 2306.12627
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.12627

Abstract:
Autoencoders have been extensively used in the development of recent anomaly
detection techniques. The premise of their application is based on the notion
that after training the autoencoder on normal training data, anomalous inputs
will exhibit a significant reconstruction error. Consequently, this enables a
clear differentiation between normal and anomalous samples. In practice,
however, it is observed that autoencoders can generalize beyond the normal class
and achieve a small reconstruction error on some of the anomalous samples. To
improve the performance, various techniques propose additional components and
more sophisticated training procedures. In this work, we propose a remarkably
straightforward alternative: instead of adding neural network components,
involved computations, and cumbersome training, we complement the reconstruction
loss with a computationally light term that regulates the norm of
representations in the latent space. The simplicity of our approach minimizes
the requirement for hyperparameter tuning and customization for new applications
which, paired with its permissive data modality constraint, enhances the
potential for successful adoption across a broad range of applications. We test
the method on various visual and tabular benchmarks and demonstrate that the
technique matches and frequently outperforms more complex alternatives. We
further demonstrate that implementing this idea in the context of state-of-the-
art methods can further improve their performance. We also provide a theoretical
analysis and numerical simulations that help demonstrate the underlying process
that unfolds during training and how it helps with anomaly detection. This
mitigates the black-box nature of autoencoder-based anomaly detection algorithms
and offers an avenue for further investigation of advantages, fail cases, and
potential new directions.
