Title: Critical-Reflective Human-AI Collaboration: Exploring Computational Tools
for Art Historical Image Retrieval
Authors: Katrin Glinka, Claudia Müller-Birn
ID: 2306.12843
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.12843

Abstract:
Just as other disciplines, the humanities explore how computational research
approaches and tools can meaningfully contribute to scholarly knowledge
production. We approach the design of computational tools through the analytical
lens of 'human-AI collaboration.' However, there is no generalizable concept of
what constitutes 'meaningful' human-AI collaboration. In terms of genuinely
human competencies, we consider criticality and reflection as guiding principles
of scholarly knowledge production. Although (designing for) reflection is a
recurring topic in CSCW and HCI discourses, it has not been centered in work on
human-AI collaboration. We posit that integrating both concepts is a viable
approach to supporting 'meaningful' human-AI collaboration in the humanities.
Our research, thus, is guided by the question of how critical reflection can be
enabled in human-AI collaboration. We address this question with a use case that
centers on computer vision (CV) tools for art historical image retrieval.
Specifically, we conducted a qualitative interview study with art historians and
extended the interviews with a think-aloud software exploration. We observed and
recorded our participants' interaction with a ready-to-use CV tool in a possible
research scenario. We found that critical reflection, indeed, constitutes a core
prerequisite for 'meaningful' human-AI collaboration in humanities research
contexts. However, we observed that critical reflection was not fully realized
during interaction with the CV tool. We interpret this divergence as supporting
our hypothesis that computational tools need to be intentionally designed in
such a way that they actively scaffold and support critical reflection during
interaction. Based on our findings, we suggest four empirically grounded design
implications for 'critical-reflective human-AI collaboration'.
