Title: Frontier AI Regulation: Managing Emerging Risks to Public Safety
Authors: Markus Anderljung, Joslyn Barnhart, Anton Korinek, Jade Leung, Cullen
O'Keefe, Jess Whittlestone, Shahar Avin, Miles Brundage, Justin Bullock, Duncan
Cass-Beggs, Ben Chang, Tantum Collins, Tim Fist, Gillian Hadfield, Alan Hayes,
Lewis Ho, Sara Hooker, Eric Horvitz, Noam Kolt, Jonas Schuett, Yonadav Shavit,
Divya Siddarth, Robert Trager, Kevin Wolf
ID: 2307.03718
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03718

Abstract:
Advanced AI models hold the promise of tremendous benefits for humanity, but
society needs to proactively manage the accompanying risks. In this paper, we
focus on what we term "frontier AI" models: highly capable foundation models
that could possess dangerous capabilities sufficient to pose severe risks to
public safety. Frontier AI models pose a distinct regulatory challenge:
dangerous capabilities can arise unexpectedly; it is difficult to robustly
prevent a deployed model from being misused; and, it is difficult to stop a
model's capabilities from proliferating broadly. To address these challenges, at
least three building blocks for the regulation of frontier models are needed:
(1) standard-setting processes to identify appropriate requirements for frontier
AI developers, (2) registration and reporting requirements to provide regulators
with visibility into frontier AI development processes, and (3) mechanisms to
ensure compliance with safety standards for the development and deployment of
frontier AI models. Industry self-regulation is an important first step.
However, wider societal discussions and government intervention will be needed
to create standards and to ensure compliance with them. We consider several
options to this end, including granting enforcement powers to supervisory
authorities and licensure regimes for frontier AI models. Finally, we propose an
initial set of safety standards. These include conducting pre-deployment risk
assessments; external scrutiny of model behavior; using risk assessments to
inform deployment decisions; and monitoring and responding to new information
about model capabilities and uses post-deployment. We hope this discussion
contributes to the broader conversation on how to balance public safety risks
and innovation benefits from advances at the frontier of AI development.
