Title: Bibliometric Analysis of Publisher and Journal Instructions to Authors on
Generative-AI in Academic and Scientific Publishing
Authors: Conner Ganjavi, Michael B. Eppler, Asli Pekcan, Brett Biedermann, Andre
Abreu, Gary S. Collins, Inderbir S. Gill, Giovanni E. Cacciamani
ID: 2307.11918
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.11918

Abstract:
We aim to determine the extent and content of guidance for authors regarding the
use of generative-AI (GAI), Generative Pretrained models (GPTs) and Large
Language Models (LLMs) powered tools among the top 100 academic publishers and
journals in science. The websites of these publishers and journals were screened
from between 19th and 20th May 2023. Among the largest 100 publishers, 17%
provided guidance on the use of GAI, of which 12 (70.6%) were among the top 25
publishers. Among the top 100 journals, 70% have provided guidance on GAI. Of
those with guidance, 94.1% of publishers and 95.7% of journals prohibited the
inclusion of GAI as an author. Four journals (5.7%) explicitly prohibit the use
of GAI in the generation of a manuscript, while 3 (17.6%) publishers and 15
(21.4%) journals indicated their guidance exclusively applies to the writing
process. When disclosing the use of GAI, 42.8% of publishers and 44.3% of
journals included specific disclosure criteria. There was variability in
guidance of where to disclose the use of GAI, including in the methods,
acknowledgments, cover letter, or a new section. There was also variability in
how to access GAI guidance and the linking of journal and publisher instructions
to authors. There is a lack of guidance by some top publishers and journals on
the use of GAI by authors. Among those publishers and journals that provide
guidance, there is substantial heterogeneity in the allowable uses of GAI and in
how it should be disclosed, with this heterogeneity persisting among affiliated
publishers and journals in some instances. The lack of standardization burdens
authors and threatens to limit the effectiveness of these regulations. There is
a need for standardized guidelines in order to protect the integrity of
scientific output as GAI continues to grow in popularity.
