Title: SecureFalcon: Are We There Yet in Automated Software Vulnerability
Detection with LLMs?
Authors: Mohamed Amine Ferrag, Ammar Battah, Norbert Tihanyi, Ridhi Jain, Diana
Maimut, Fatima Alwahedi, Thierry Lestable, Narinderjit Singh Thandi, Abdechakour
Mechri, Merouane Debbah, Lucas C. Cordeiro
ID: 2307.06616
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.06616

Abstract:
Software vulnerabilities can cause numerous problems, including crashes, data
loss, and security breaches. These issues greatly compromise quality and can
negatively impact the market adoption of software applications and systems.
Traditional bug-fixing methods, such as static analysis, often produce false
positives. While bounded model checking, a form of Formal Verification (FV), can
provide more accurate outcomes compared to static analyzers, it demands
substantial resources and significantly hinders developer productivity. Can
Machine Learning (ML) achieve accuracy comparable to FV methods and be used in
popular instant code completion frameworks in near real-time? In this paper, we
introduce SecureFalcon, an innovative model architecture with only 121 million
parameters derived from the Falcon-40B model and explicitly tailored for
classifying software vulnerabilities. To achieve the best performance, we
trained our model using two datasets, namely the FormAI dataset and the
FalconVulnDB. The FalconVulnDB is a combination of recent public datasets,
namely the SySeVR framework, Draper VDISC, Bigvul, Diversevul, SARD Juliet, and
ReVeal datasets. These datasets contain the top 25 most dangerous software
weaknesses, such as CWE-119, CWE-120, CWE-476, CWE-122, CWE-190, CWE-121,
CWE-78, CWE-787, CWE-20, and CWE-762. SecureFalcon achieves 94% accuracy in
binary classification and up to 92% in multiclassification, with instant CPU
inference times. It outperforms existing models such as BERT, RoBERTa, CodeBERT,
and traditional ML algorithms, promising to push the boundaries of software
vulnerability detection and instant code completion frameworks.
