Title: General Purpose Artificial Intelligence Systems (GPAIS): Properties,
Definition, Taxonomy, Societal Implications and Responsible Governance
Authors: Isaac Triguero, Daniel Molina, Javier Poyatos, Javier Del Ser,
Francisco Herrera
ID: 2307.14283
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.14283

Abstract:
Most applications of Artificial Intelligence (AI) are designed for a confined
and specific task. However, there are many scenarios that call for a more
general AI, capable of solving a wide array of tasks without being specifically
designed for them. The term General-Purpose Artificial Intelligence Systems
(GPAIS) has been defined to refer to these AI systems. To date, the possibility
of an Artificial General Intelligence, powerful enough to perform any
intellectual task as if it were human, or even improve it, has remained an
aspiration, fiction, and considered a risk for our society. Whilst we might
still be far from achieving that, GPAIS is a reality and sitting at the
forefront of AI research. This work discusses existing definitions for GPAIS and
proposes a new definition that allows for a gradual differentiation among types
of GPAIS according to their properties and limitations. We distinguish between
closed-world and open-world GPAIS, characterising their degree of autonomy and
ability based on several factors such as adaptation to new tasks, competence in
domains not intentionally trained for, ability to learn from few data, or
proactive acknowledgment of their own limitations. We propose a taxonomy of
approaches to realise GPAIS, describing research trends such as the use of AI
techniques to improve another AI (AI-powered AI) or (single) foundation models.
As a prime example, we delve into GenAI, aligning them with the concepts
presented in the taxonomy. We explore multi-modality, which involves fusing
various types of data sources to expand the capabilities of GPAIS. Through the
proposed definition and taxonomy, our aim is to facilitate research
collaboration across different areas that are tackling general purpose tasks, as
they share many common aspects. Finally, we discuss the state of GPAIS,
prospects, societal implications, and the need for regulation and governance.
