Title: National Origin Discrimination in Deep-learning-powered Automated Resume
Screening
Authors: Sihang Li, Kuangzheng Li, Haibing Lu
ID: 2307.08624
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.08624

Abstract:
Many companies and organizations have started to use some form of AIenabled auto
mated tools to assist in their hiring process, e.g. screening resumes,
interviewing candi dates, performance evaluation. While those AI tools have
greatly improved human re source operations efficiency and provided conveniences
to job seekers as well, there are increasing concerns on unfair treatment to
candidates, caused by underlying bias in AI systems. Laws around equal
opportunity and fairness, like GDPR, CCPA, are introduced or under development,
in attempt to regulate AI. However, it is difficult to implement AI regulations
in practice, as technologies are constantly advancing and the risk perti nent to
their applications can fail to be recognized. This study examined deep learning
methods, a recent technology breakthrough, with focus on their application to
automated resume screening. One impressive performance of deep learning methods
is the represen tation of individual words as lowdimensional numerical vectors,
called word embedding, which are learned from aggregated global wordword
cooccurrence statistics from a cor pus, like Wikipedia or Google news. The
resulting word representations possess interest ing linear substructures of the
word vector space and have been widely used in down stream tasks, like resume
screening. However, word embedding inherits and reinforces the stereotyping from
the training corpus, as deep learning models essentially learn a probability
distribution of words and their relations from history data. Our study finds out
that if we rely on such deeplearningpowered automated resume screening tools, it
may lead to decisions favoring or disfavoring certain demographic groups and
raise eth ical, even legal, concerns. To address the issue, we developed bias
mitigation method. Extensive experiments on real candidate resumes are conducted
to validate our study
