Title: Applying HCAI in developing effective human-AI teaming: A perspective
from human-AI joint cognitive systems
Authors: Wei Xu, Zaifeng Gao
ID: 2307.03913
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03913

Abstract:
Research and application have used human-AI teaming (HAT) as a new paradigm to
develop AI systems. HAT recognizes that AI will function as a teammate instead
of simply a tool in collaboration with humans. Effective human-AI teams need to
be capable of taking advantage of the unique abilities of both humans and AI
while overcoming the known challenges and limitations of each member, augmenting
human capabilities, and raising joint performance beyond that of either entity.
The National AI Research and Strategic Plan 2023 update has recognized that
research programs focusing primarily on the independent performance of AI
systems generally fail to consider the functionality that AI must provide within
the context of dynamic, adaptive, and collaborative teams and calls for further
research on human-AI teaming and collaboration. However, there has been debate
about whether AI can work as a teammate with humans. The primary concern is that
adopting the "teaming" paradigm contradicts the human-centered AI (HCAI)
approach, resulting in humans losing control of AI systems. This article further
analyzes the HAT paradigm and the debates. Specifically, we elaborate on our
proposed conceptual framework of human-AI joint cognitive systems (HAIJCS) and
apply it to represent HAT under the HCAI umbrella. We believe that HAIJCS may
help adopt HAI while enabling HCAI. The implications and future work for HAIJCS
are also discussed.
  Insights: AI has led to the emergence of a new form of human-machine
relationship: human-AI teaming (HAT), a paradigmatic shift in human-AI systems;
We must follow a human-centered AI (HCAI) approach when applying HAT as a new
design paradigm; We propose a conceptual framework of human-AI joint cognitive
systems (HAIJCS) to represent and implement HAT for developing effective human-
AI teaming
