Title: The Future of Fundamental Science Led by Generative Closed-Loop
Artificial Intelligence
Authors: Hector Zenil, Jesper Tegnér, Felipe S. Abrahão, Alexander Lavin, Vipin
Kumar, Jeremy G. Frey, Adrian Weller, Larisa Soldatova, Alan R. Bundy, Nicholas
R. Jennings, Koichi Takahashi, Lawrence Hunter, Saso Dzeroski, Andrew Briggs,
Frederick D. Gregory, Carla P. Gomes, Jon Rowe, James Evans, Hiroaki Kitano,
Ross King
ID: 2307.07522
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.07522

Abstract:
Recent advances in machine learning and AI, including Generative AI and LLMs,
are disrupting technological innovation, product development, and society as a
whole. AI's contribution to technology can come from multiple approaches that
require access to large training data sets and clear performance evaluation
criteria, ranging from pattern recognition and classification to generative
models. Yet, AI has contributed less to fundamental science in part because
large data sets of high-quality data for scientific practice and model discovery
are more difficult to access. Generative AI, in general, and Large Language
Models in particular, may represent an opportunity to augment and accelerate the
scientific discovery of fundamental deep science with quantitative models. Here
we explore and investigate aspects of an AI-driven, automated, closed-loop
approach to scientific discovery, including self-driven hypothesis generation
and open-ended autonomous exploration of the hypothesis space. Integrating AI-
driven automation into the practice of science would mitigate current problems,
including the replication of findings, systematic production of data, and
ultimately democratisation of the scientific process. Realising these
possibilities requires a vision for augmented AI coupled with a diversity of AI
approaches able to deal with fundamental aspects of causality analysis and model
discovery while enabling unbiased search across the space of putative
explanations. These advances hold the promise to unleash AI's potential for
searching and discovering the fundamental structure of our world beyond what
human scientists have been able to achieve. Such a vision would push the
boundaries of new fundamental science rather than automatize current workflows
and instead open doors for technological innovation to tackle some of the
greatest challenges facing humanity today.
