Title: Machine-directed gravitational-wave counterpart discovery
Authors: Niharika Sravan, Matthew J. Graham, Michael W. Coughlin, Tomas Ahumada,
Shreya Anand
ID: 2307.09213
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09213

Abstract:
Joint observations in electromagnetic and gravitational waves shed light on the
physics of objects and surrounding environments with extreme gravity that are
otherwise unreachable via siloed observations in each messenger. However, such
detections remain challenging due to the rapid and faint nature of counterparts.
Protocols for discovery and inference still rely on human experts manually
inspecting survey alert streams and intuiting optimal usage of limited follow-up
resources. Strategizing an optimal follow-up program requires adaptive
sequential decision-making given evolving light curve data that (i) maximizes a
global objective despite incomplete information and (ii) is robust to
stochasticity introduced by detectors/observing conditions. Reinforcement
learning (RL) approaches allow agents to implicitly learn the physics/detector
dynamics and the behavior policy that maximize a designated objective through
experience. To demonstrate the utility of such an approach for the kilonova
follow-up problem, we train a toy RL agent for the goal of maximizing follow-up
photometry for the true kilonova among several contaminant transient light
curves. In a simulated environment where the agent learns online, it achieves 3x
higher accuracy compared to a random strategy. However, it is surpassed by human
agents by up to a factor of 2. This is likely because our hypothesis function (Q
that is linear in state-action features) is an insufficient representation of
the optimal behavior policy. More complex agents could perform at par or surpass
human experts. Agents like these could pave the way for machine-directed
software infrastructure to efficiently respond to next generation detectors, for
conducting science inference and optimally planning expensive follow-up
observations, scalably and with demonstrable performance guarantees.
