Title: Integrated supervisory control and fixed path speed trajectory generation
for hybrid electric ships via convex optimization
Authors: Antti Ritari, Niklas Katzenburg, Fabricio Oliveira, Kari Tammi
ID: 2307.06184
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.06184

Abstract:
Battery-hybrid power source architectures can reduce fuel consumption and
emissions for ships with diverse operation profiles. However, conventional
control strategies may fail to improve performance if the future operation
profile is unknown to the controller. This paper proposes a guidance,
navigation, and control (GNC) function that integrates trajectory generation and
hybrid power source supervisory control. We focus on time and fuel optimal path-
constrained trajectory planning. This problem is a nonlinear and nonconvex
optimal control problem, which means that it is not readily amenable to
efficient and reliable solution onboard. We propose a nonlinear change of
variables and constraint relaxations that transform the nonconvex planning
problem into a convex optimal control problem. The nonconvex three-degree-of-
freedom dynamics, hydrodynamic forces, fixed pitch propeller, battery, and
general energy converter (e.g., fuel cell or generating set) dissipation
constraints are expressed in convex functional form. A condition derived from
Pontryagin's Minimum Principle guarantees that, when satisfied, the solution of
the relaxed problem provides the solution to the original problem. The validity
and effectiveness of this approach are numerically illustrated for a battery-
hybrid vessel in model scale. First, the convex hydrodynamic hull and rudder
force models are validated with towing tank test data. Second, optimal
trajectories and supervisory control schemes are evaluated under varying mission
requirements. The convexification scheme in this work lays the path for the
employment of mature, computationally robust convex optimization methods and
creates a novel possibility for real-time optimization onboard future smart and
unmanned surface vehicles.
