Title: An Exploration of Mars Colonization with Agent-Based Modeling
Authors: Edgar Arguello, Sam Carter, Cristina Grieg, Michael Hammer, Chris
Prather, Clark Petri, Anamaria Berea
ID: 2308.05916
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.05916

Abstract:
Establishing a human settlement on Mars is an incredibly complex engineering
problem. The inhospitable nature of the Martian environment requires any habitat
to be largely self-sustaining. Beyond mining a few basic minerals and water, the
colonizers will be dependent on Earth resupply and replenishment of necessities
via technological means, i.e., splitting Martian water into oxygen for breathing
and hydrogen for fuel. Beyond the technical and engineering challenges, future
colonists will also face psychological and human behavior challenges. Our goal
is to better understand the behavioral and psychological interactions of future
Martian colonists through an Agent-Based Modeling (ABM simulation) approach. We
seek to identify areas of consideration for planning a colony as well as propose
a minimum initial population size required to create a stable colony. Accounting
for engineering and technological limitations, we draw on research regarding
high performing teams in isolated and high stress environments (ex: submarines,
Arctic exploration, ISS, war) to include the 4 basic personality types within
the ABM. Interactions between agents with different psychological profiles are
modeled at the individual level, while global events such as accidents or delays
in Earth resupply affect the colony as a whole. From our multiple simulations
and scenarios (up to 28 Earth years), we found that an initial population of 22
was the minimum required to maintain a viable colony size over the long run. We
also found that the agreeable personality type was the one more likely to
survive. We find, contrary to other literature, that the minimum number of
people with all personality types that can lead to a sustainable settlement is
in the tens and not hundreds.
