Title: Context-aware Event Forecasting via Graph Disentanglement
Authors: Yunshan Ma, Chenchen Ye, Zijian Wu, Xiang Wang, Yixin Cao, Tat-Seng
Chua
ID: 2308.06480
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.06480

Abstract:
Event forecasting has been a demanding and challenging task throughout the
entire human history. It plays a pivotal role in crisis alarming and disaster
prevention in various aspects of the whole society. The task of event
forecasting aims to model the relational and temporal patterns based on
historical events and makes forecasting to what will happen in the future. Most
existing studies on event forecasting formulate it as a problem of link
prediction on temporal event graphs. However, such pure structured formulation
suffers from two main limitations: 1) most events fall into general and high-
level types in the event ontology, and therefore they tend to be coarse-grained
and offers little utility which inevitably harms the forecasting accuracy; and
2) the events defined by a fixed ontology are unable to retain the out-of-
ontology contextual information. To address these limitations, we propose a
novel task of context-aware event forecasting which incorporates auxiliary
contextual information. First, the categorical context provides supplementary
fine-grained information to the coarse-grained events. Second and more
importantly, the context provides additional information towards specific
situation and condition, which is crucial or even determinant to what will
happen next. However, it is challenging to properly integrate context into the
event forecasting framework, considering the complex patterns in the multi-
context scenario. Towards this end, we design a novel framework named Separation
and Collaboration Graph Disentanglement (short as SeCoGD) for context-aware
event forecasting. Since there is no available dataset for this novel task, we
construct three large-scale datasets based on GDELT. Experimental results
demonstrate that our model outperforms a list of SOTA methods.
