Title: Data-Driven Approaches to Searches for the Technosignatures of Advanced
Civilizations
Authors: T. Joseph W. Lazio, S. G. Djorgovski, Andrew Howard, Curt Cutler, Sofia
Z. Sheikh, Stefano Cavuoti, Denise Herzing, Kiri Wagstaff, Jason T. Wright,
Vishal Gajjar, Kevin Hand, Umaa Rebbapragada, Bruce Allen, Erica Cartmill, Jacob
Foster, Dawn Gelino, Matthew J. Graham, Giuseppe Longo, Ashish A. Mahabal, Lior
Pachter, Vikram Ravi, Gerald Sussman
ID: 2308.15518
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.15518

Abstract:
Humanity has wondered whether we are alone for millennia. The discovery of life
elsewhere in the Universe, particularly intelligent life, would have profound
effects, comparable to those of recognizing that the Earth is not the center of
the Universe and that humans evolved from previous species. There has been rapid
growth in the fields of extrasolar planets and data-driven astronomy. In a
relatively short interval, we have seen a change from knowing of no extrasolar
planets to now knowing more potentially habitable extrasolar planets than there
are planets in the Solar System. In approximately the same interval, astronomy
has transitioned to a field in which sky surveys can generate 1 PB or more of
data. The Data-Driven Approaches to Searches for the Technosignatures of
Advanced Civilizations_ study at the W. M. Keck Institute for Space Studies was
intended to revisit searches for evidence of alien technologies in light of
these developments. Data-driven searches, being able to process volumes of data
much greater than a human could, and in a reproducible manner, can identify
*anomalies* that could be clues to the presence of technosignatures. A key
outcome of this workshop was that technosignature searches should be conducted
in a manner consistent with Freeman Dyson's "First Law of SETI Investigations,"
namely "every search for alien civilizations should be planned to give
interesting results even when no aliens are discovered." This approach to
technosignatures is commensurate with NASA's approach to biosignatures in that
no single observation or measurement can be taken as providing full certainty
for the detection of life. Areas of particular promise identified during the
workshop were (*) Data Mining of Large Sky Surveys, (*) All-Sky Survey at Far-
Infrared Wavelengths, (*) Surveys with Radio Astronomical Interferometers, and
(*) Artifacts in the Solar System.
