Title: Dimensional measures of generalized entropy
Authors: Vladimir Zhdankin
ID: 2308.09452
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.09452

Abstract:
Entropy is useful in statistical problems as a measure of irreversibility,
randomness, mixing, dispersion, and number of microstates. However, there
remains ambiguity over the precise mathematical formulation of entropy,
generalized beyond the additive definition pioneered by Boltzmann, Gibbs, and
Shannon (applicable to thermodynamic equilibria). For generalized entropies to
be applied rigorously to nonequilibrium statistical mechanics, we suggest that
there is a need for a physically interpretable (dimensional) framework that can
be connected to dynamical processes operating in phase space. In this work, we
introduce dimensional measures of entropy that admit arbitrary invertible weight
functions (subject to curvature and convergence requirements). These
"dimensional entropies" have physical dimensions of phase-space volume and
represent the extent of level sets of the distribution function. Dimensional
entropies with power-law weight functions (related to Rényi and Tsallis
entropies) are particularly robust, as they do not require any internal
dimensional parameters due to their scale invariance. We also point out the
existence of composite entropy measures that can be constructed from functionals
of dimensional entropies. We calculate the response of the dimensional entropies
to perturbations, showing that for a structured distribution, perturbations have
the largest impact on entropies weighted at a similar phase-space scale. This
elucidates the link between dynamics (perturbations) and statistics (entropies).
Finally, we derive corresponding generalized maximum-entropy distributions.
Dimensional entropies may be useful as a diagnostic (for irreversibility) and
for theoretical modeling (if the underlying irreversible processes in phase
space are understood) in chaotic and complex systems, such as collisionless
systems of particles with long-range interactions.
