Title: A Brain-Computer Interface Augmented Reality Framework with Auto-Adaptive
SSVEP Recognition
Authors: Yasmine Mustafa, Mohamed Elmahallawy, Tie Luo, Seif Eldawlatly
ID: 2308.06401
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.06401

Abstract:
Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) initially gained attention for developing
applications that aid physically impaired individuals. Recently, the idea of
integrating BCI with Augmented Reality (AR) emerged, which uses BCI not only to
enhance the quality of life for individuals with disabilities but also to
develop mainstream applications for healthy users. One commonly used BCI signal
pattern is the Steady-state Visually-evoked Potential (SSVEP), which captures
the brain's response to flickering visual stimuli. SSVEP-based BCI-AR
applications enable users to express their needs/wants by simply looking at
corresponding command options. However, individuals are different in brain
signals and thus require per-subject SSVEP recognition. Moreover, muscle
movements and eye blinks interfere with brain signals, and thus subjects are
required to remain still during BCI experiments, which limits AR engagement. In
this paper, we (1) propose a simple adaptive ensemble classification system that
handles the inter-subject variability, (2) present a simple BCI-AR framework
that supports the development of a wide range of SSVEP-based BCI-AR
applications, and (3) evaluate the performance of our ensemble algorithm in an
SSVEP-based BCI-AR application with head rotations which has demonstrated
robustness to the movement interference. Our testing on multiple subjects
achieved a mean accuracy of 80\% on a PC and 77\% using the HoloLens AR headset,
both of which surpass previous studies that incorporate individual classifiers
and head movements. In addition, our visual stimulation time is 5 seconds which
is relatively short. The statistically significant results show that our
ensemble classification approach outperforms individual classifiers in SSVEP-
based BCIs.
