Title: Evaluation of a Low-Cost Single-Lead ECG Module for Vascular Ageing
Prediction and Studying Smoking-induced Changes in ECG
Authors: S. Anas Ali, M. Saqib Niaz, Mubashir Rehman, Ahsan Mehmood, M. Mahboob
Ur Rahman, Kashif Riaz, Qammer H. Abbasi
ID: 2308.04355
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.04355

Abstract:
Vascular age is traditionally measured using invasive methods or through 12-lead
electrocardiogram (ECG). This paper utilizes a low-cost single-lead (lead-I) ECG
module to predict the vascular age of an apparently healthy young person. In
addition, we also study the impact of smoking on ECG traces of the light-but-
habitual smokers. We begin by collecting (lead-I) ECG data from 42 apparently
healthy subjects (smokers and non-smokers) aged 18 to 30 years, using our
custom-built low-cost single-lead ECG module, and anthropometric data, e.g.,
body mass index, smoking status, blood pressure, etc. Under our proposed method,
we first pre-process our dataset by denoising the ECG traces, followed by
baseline drift removal, followed by z-score normalization. Next, we create
another dataset by dividing the ECG traces into overlapping segments of five-
second duration. We then feed both segmented and unsegmented datasets to a
number of machine learning models, a 1D convolutional neural network, and
ResNet18 model, for vascular ageing prediction. We also do transfer learning
whereby we pre-train our models on a public PPG dataset, and later, fine-tune
and evaluate them on our unsegmented ECG dataset. The random forest model
outperforms all other models and previous works by achieving a mean squared
error (MSE) of 0.07 and coefficient of determination R2 of 0.99, MSE of 3.56 and
R2 of 0.26, MSE of 0.99 and R2 of 0.87, for segmented ECG dataset, for
unsegmented ECG dataset, and for transfer learning scenario, respectively.
Finally, we utilize the explainable AI framework to identify those ECG features
that get affected due to smoking. This work is aligned with the sustainable
development goals 3 and 10 of the United Nations which aim to provide low-cost
but quality healthcare solutions to the unprivileged. This work also finds its
applications in the broad domain of forensic science.
