Title: ROSGPT_Vision: Commanding Robots Using Only Language Models' Prompts
Authors: Bilel Benjdira, Anis Koubaa, Anas M. Ali
ID: 2308.11236
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.11236

Abstract:
In this paper, we argue that the next generation of robots can be commanded
using only Language Models' prompts. Every prompt interrogates separately a
specific Robotic Modality via its Modality Language Model (MLM). A central Task
Modality mediates the whole communication to execute the robotic mission via a
Large Language Model (LLM). This paper gives this new robotic design pattern the
name of: Prompting Robotic Modalities (PRM). Moreover, this paper applies this
PRM design pattern in building a new robotic framework named ROSGPT_Vision.
ROSGPT_Vision allows the execution of a robotic task using only two prompts: a
Visual and an LLM prompt. The Visual Prompt extracts, in natural language, the
visual semantic features related to the task under consideration (Visual Robotic
Modality). Meanwhile, the LLM Prompt regulates the robotic reaction to the
visual description (Task Modality). The framework automates all the mechanisms
behind these two prompts. The framework enables the robot to address complex
real-world scenarios by processing visual data, making informed decisions, and
carrying out actions automatically. The framework comprises one generic vision
module and two independent ROS nodes. As a test application, we used
ROSGPT_Vision to develop CarMate, which monitors the driver's distraction on the
roads and makes real-time vocal notifications to the driver. We showed how
ROSGPT_Vision significantly reduced the development cost compared to traditional
methods. We demonstrated how to improve the quality of the application by
optimizing the prompting strategies, without delving into technical details.
ROSGPT_Vision is shared with the community (link: https://github.com/bilel-
bj/ROSGPT_Vision) to advance robotic research in this direction and to build
more robotic frameworks that implement the PRM design pattern and enables
controlling robots using only prompts.
