Title: $A^2$Nav: Action-Aware Zero-Shot Robot Navigation by Exploiting Vision-
and-Language Ability of Foundation Models
Authors: Peihao Chen, Xinyu Sun, Hongyan Zhi, Runhao Zeng, Thomas H. Li, Gaowen
Liu, Mingkui Tan, Chuang Gan
ID: 2308.07997
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.07997

Abstract:
We study the task of zero-shot vision-and-language navigation (ZS-VLN), a
practical yet challenging problem in which an agent learns to navigate following
a path described by language instructions without requiring any path-instruction
annotation data. Normally, the instructions have complex grammatical structures
and often contain various action descriptions (e.g., "proceed beyond", "depart
from"). How to correctly understand and execute these action demands is a
critical problem, and the absence of annotated data makes it even more
challenging. Note that a well-educated human being can easily understand path
instructions without the need for any special training. In this paper, we
propose an action-aware zero-shot VLN method ($A^2$Nav) by exploiting the
vision-and-language ability of foundation models. Specifically, the proposed
method consists of an instruction parser and an action-aware navigation policy.
The instruction parser utilizes the advanced reasoning ability of large language
models (e.g., GPT-3) to decompose complex navigation instructions into a
sequence of action-specific object navigation sub-tasks. Each sub-task requires
the agent to localize the object and navigate to a specific goal position
according to the associated action demand. To accomplish these sub-tasks, an
action-aware navigation policy is learned from freely collected action-specific
datasets that reveal distinct characteristics of each action demand. We use the
learned navigation policy for executing sub-tasks sequentially to follow the
navigation instruction. Extensive experiments show $A^2$Nav achieves promising
ZS-VLN performance and even surpasses the supervised learning methods on
R2R-Habitat and RxR-Habitat datasets.
