Title: Learn Single-horizon Disease Evolution for Predictive Generation of Post-
therapeutic Neovascular Age-related Macular Degeneration
Authors: Yuhan Zhang, Kun Huang, Mingchao Li, Songtao Yuan, Qiang Chen
ID: 2308.06432
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.06432

Abstract:
Most of the existing disease prediction methods in the field of medical image
processing fall into two classes, namely image-to-category predictions and
image-to-parameter predictions. Few works have focused on image-to-image
predictions. Different from multi-horizon predictions in other fields,
ophthalmologists prefer to show more confidence in single-horizon predictions
due to the low tolerance of predictive risk. We propose a single-horizon disease
evolution network (SHENet) to predictively generate post-therapeutic SD-OCT
images by inputting pre-therapeutic SD-OCT images with neovascular age-related
macular degeneration (nAMD). In SHENet, a feature encoder converts the input SD-
OCT images to deep features, then a graph evolution module predicts the process
of disease evolution in high-dimensional latent space and outputs the predicted
deep features, and lastly, feature decoder recovers the predicted deep features
to SD-OCT images. We further propose an evolution reinforcement module to ensure
the effectiveness of disease evolution learning and obtain realistic SD-OCT
images by adversarial training. SHENet is validated on 383 SD-OCT cubes of 22
nAMD patients based on three well-designed schemes based on the quantitative and
qualitative evaluations. Compared with other generative methods, the generative
SD-OCT images of SHENet have the highest image quality. Besides, SHENet achieves
the best structure protection and content prediction. Qualitative evaluations
also demonstrate that SHENet has a better visual effect than other methods.
SHENet can generate post-therapeutic SD-OCT images with both high prediction
performance and good image quality, which has great potential to help
ophthalmologists forecast the therapeutic effect of nAMD.
