Title: Sequential Monte Carlo with Cross-validated Neural Networks for
Complexity of Hyperbolic Black Hole Solutions in 4D
Authors: Armin Hatefi, Ehsan Hatefi
ID: 2308.07907
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.07907

Abstract:
This paper investigates the self-similar solutions of the Einstein-axion-dilaton
configuration from type IIB string theory and the global SL(2,R) symmetry. We
consider the Continuous Self Similarity (CSS), where the scale transformation is
controlled by an SL(2, R) boost or hyperbolic translation. The solutions stay
invariant under the combination of space-time dilation with internal SL(2,R)
transformations. We develop a new formalism based on Sequential Monte Carlo
(SMC) and artificial neural networks (NNs) to estimate the self-similar
solutions to the equations of motion in the hyperbolic class in four dimensions.
Due to the complex and highly nonlinear patterns, researchers typically have to
use various constraints and numerical approximation methods to estimate the
equations of motion; thus, they have to overlook the measurement errors in
parameter estimation. Through a Bayesian framework, we incorporate measurement
errors into our models to find the solutions to the hyperbolic equations of
motion. It is well known that the hyperbolic class suffers from multiple
solutions where the critical collapse functions have overlap domains for these
solutions. To deal with this complexity, for the first time in literature on the
axion-dilaton system, we propose the SMC approach to obtain the multi-modal
posterior distributions. Through a probabilistic perspective, we confirm the
deterministic $α$ and $β$ solutions available in the literature and determine
all possible solutions that may occur due to measurement errors. We finally
proposed the penalized Leave-One-Out Cross-validation (LOOCV) to combine the
Bayesian NN-based estimates optimally. The approach enables us to determine the
optimum weights while dealing with the co-linearity issue in the NN-based
estimates and better predict the critical functions corresponding to multiple
solutions of the equations of motion.
