Title: Ultrafast Radiographic Imaging and Tracking: An overview of instruments,
methods, data, and applications
Authors: Zhehui Wang, Andrew F. T. Leong, Angelo Dragone, Arianna E. Gleason,
Rafael Ballabriga, Christopher Campbell, Michael Campbell, Samuel J. Clark,
Cinzia Da Vià, Dana M. Dattelbaum, Marcel Demarteau, Lorenzo Fabris, Kamel
Fezzaa, Eric R. Fossum, Sol M. Gruner, Todd Hufnagel, Xiaolu Ju, Ke Li, Xavier
Llopart, Bratislav Lukić, Alexander Rack, Joseph Strehlow, Audrey C. Therrien,
Julia Thom-Levy, Feixiang Wang, Tiqiao Xiao, Mingwei Xu, Xin Yue
ID: 2308.10643
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.10643

Abstract:
Ultrafast radiographic imaging and tracking (U-RadIT) use state-of-the-art
ionizing particle and light sources to experimentally study sub-nanosecond
dynamic processes in physics, chemistry, biology, geology, materials science and
other fields. These processes, fundamental to nuclear fusion energy, advanced
manufacturing, green transportation and others, often involve one mole or more
atoms, and thus are challenging to compute by using the first principles of
quantum physics or other forward models. One of the central problems in U-RadIT
is to optimize information yield through, e.g. high-luminosity X-ray and
particle sources, efficient imaging and tracking detectors, novel methods to
collect data, and large-bandwidth online and offline data processing, regulated
by the underlying physics, statistics, and computing power. We review and
highlight recent progress in: a.) Detectors; b.) U-RadIT modalities; c.) Data
and algorithms; and d.) Applications. Hardware-centric approaches to U-RadIT
optimization are constrained by detector material properties, low signal-to-
noise ratio, high cost and long development cycles of critical hardware
components such as ASICs. Interpretation of experimental data, including
comparisons with forward models, is frequently hindered by sparse measurements,
model and measurement uncertainties, and noise. Alternatively, U-RadIT make
increasing use of data science and machine learning algorithms, including
experimental implementations of compressed sensing. Machine learning and
artificial intelligence approaches, refined by physics and materials
information, may also contribute significantly to data interpretation,
uncertainty quantification, and U-RadIT optimization.
