Title: A Search for Technosignatures Around 11,680 Stars with the Green Bank
Telescope at 1.15-1.73 GHz
Authors: Jean-Luc Margot, Megan G. Li, Pavlo Pinchuk, Nathan Myhrvold, Larry
Lesyna, Lea E. Alcantara, Megan T. Andrakin, Jeth Arunseangroj, Damien S.
Baclet, Madison H. Belk, Zerxes R. Bhadha, Nicholas W. Brandis, Robert E. Carey,
Harrison P. Cassar, Sai S. Chava, Calvin Chen, James Chen, Kellen T. Cheng,
Alessia Cimbri, Benjamin Cloutier, Jordan A. Combitsis, Kelly L. Couvrette,
Brandon P. Coy, Kyle W. Davis, Antoine F. Delcayre, Michelle R. Du, Sarah E.
Feil, Danning Fu, Travis J. Gilmore, Emery Grahill-Bland, Laura M. Iglesias, Zoe
Juneau, Anthony G. Karapetian, George Karfakis, Christopher T. Lambert, Eric A.
Lazbin, Jian H. Li,  Zhuofu,  Li, Nicholas M. Liskij, Anthony V. Lopilato,
Darren J. Lu, Detao Ma, Vedant Mathur, Mary H. Minasyan, Maxwell K. Muller, Mark
T. Nasielski, Janice T. Nguyen, Lorraine M. Nicholson, Samantha Niemoeller,
Divij Ohri, Atharva U. Padhye, Supreethi V. Penmetcha, Yugantar Prakash,  Xinyi,
Qi, Liam Rindt, Vedant Sahu, Joshua A. Scally, Zefyr Scott, Trevor J. Seddon,
Lara-Lynn V. Shohet, Anchal Sinha, Anthony E. Sinigiani, Jiuxu Song, Spencer M.
Stice, Andria Uplisashvili, Krishna Vanga, Amaury G. Vazquez, George Vetushko,
Valeria Villa, Maria Vincent, Ian J. Waasdorp, Ian B. Wagaman, Amanda Wang, Jade
C. Wight, Ella Wong, Natsuko Yamaguchi, Zijin Zhang, Junyang Zhao, Ryan S. Lynch
ID: 2308.02712
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.02712

Abstract:
We conducted a search for narrowband radio signals over four observing sessions
in 2020-2023 with the L-band receiver (1.15-1.73 GHz) of the 100 m diameter
Green Bank Telescope. We pointed the telescope in the directions of 62 TESS
Objects of Interest, capturing radio emissions from a total of ~11,680 stars and
planetary systems in the ~9 arcminute beam of the telescope. All detections were
either automatically rejected or visually inspected and confirmed to be of
anthropogenic nature. In this work, we also quantified the end-to-end efficiency
of radio SETI pipelines with a signal injection and recovery analysis. The UCLA
SETI pipeline recovers 94.0% of the injected signals over the usable frequency
range of the receiver and 98.7% of the injections when regions of dense RFI are
excluded. In another pipeline that uses incoherent sums of 51 consecutive
spectra, the recovery rate is ~15 times smaller at ~6%. The pipeline efficiency
affects calculations of transmitter prevalence and SETI search volume.
Accordingly, we developed an improved Drake Figure of Merit and a formalism to
place upper limits on transmitter prevalence that take the pipeline efficiency
and transmitter duty cycle into account. Based on our observations, we can state
at the 95% confidence level that fewer than 6.6% of stars within 100 pc host a
transmitter that is detectable in our search (EIRP > 1e13 W). For stars within
20,000 ly, the fraction of stars with detectable transmitters (EIRP > 5e16 W) is
at most 3e-4. Finally, we showed that the UCLA SETI pipeline natively detects
the signals detected with AI techniques by Ma et al. (2023).
