Title: Bootstrapping Developmental AIs: From Simple Competences to Intelligent
Human-Compatible AIs
Authors: Mark Stefik, Robert Price
ID: 2308.04586
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.04586

Abstract:
Developmental AI creates embodied AIs that develop human-like abilities. The AIs
start with innate competences and learn more by interacting with the world
including people. Developmental AIs have been demonstrated, but their abilities
so far do not surpass those of pre-toddler children. In contrast, mainstream
approaches have led to impressive feats and commercially valuable AI systems.
The approaches include deep learning and generative AI (e.g., large language
models) and manually constructed symbolic modeling. However, manually
constructed AIs tend to be brittle even in circumscribed domains. Generative AIs
are helpful on average, but they can make strange mistakes and not notice them.
Not learning from their experience in the world, they can lack common sense and
social alignment. This position paper lays out prospects, gaps, and challenges
for a bootstrapping approach to developmental AI that follows a bio-inspired
trajectory. The approach creates experiential foundation models for human-
compatible AIs. A virtuous multidisciplinary research cycle has led to
developmental AIs with capabilities for multimodal perception, object
recognition, and manipulation. Computational models for hierarchical planning,
abstraction discovery, curiosity, and language acquisition exist but need to be
adapted to an embodied learning approach. The remaining gaps include nonverbal
communication, speech, reading, and writing. These competences enable people to
acquire socially developed competences. Aspirationally, developmental AIs would
learn, share what they learn, and collaborate to achieve high standards. They
would learn to communicate, establish common ground, read critically, consider
the provenance of information, test hypotheses, and collaborate. The approach
would make the training of AIs more democratic.
