Title: Prostate Age Gap (PAG): An MRI surrogate marker of aging for prostate
cancer detection
Authors: Alvaro Fernandez-Quilez, Tobias Nordström, Fredrik Jäderling, Svein
Reidar Kjosavik, Martin Eklund
ID: 2308.05344
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.05344

Abstract:
Background: Prostate cancer (PC) MRI-based risk calculators are commonly based
on biological (e.g. PSA), MRI markers (e.g. volume), and patient age. Whilst
patient age measures the amount of years an individual has existed, biological
age (BA) might better reflect the physiology of an individual. However,
surrogates from prostate MRI and linkage with clinically significant PC (csPC)
remain to be explored. Purpose: To obtain and evaluate Prostate Age Gap (PAG) as
an MRI marker tool for csPC risk. Study type: Retrospective. Population: A total
of 7243 prostate MRI slices from 468 participants who had undergone prostate
biopsies. A deep learning model was trained on 3223 MRI slices cropped around
the gland from 81 low-grade PC (ncsPC, Gleason score <=6) and 131 negative cases
and tested on the remaining 256 participants. Assessment: Chronological age was
defined as the age of the participant at the time of the visit and used to train
the deep learning model to predict the age of the patient. Following, we
obtained PAG, defined as the model predicted age minus the patient's
chronological age. Multivariate logistic regression models were used to estimate
the association through odds ratio (OR) and predictive value of PAG and compared
against PSA levels and PI-RADS>=3. Statistical tests: T-test, Mann-Whitney U
test, Permutation test and ROC curve analysis. Results: The multivariate
adjusted model showed a significant difference in the odds of clinically
significant PC (csPC, Gleason score >=7) (OR =3.78, 95% confidence interval
(CI):2.32-6.16, P <.001). PAG showed a better predictive ability when compared
to PI-RADS>=3 and adjusted by other risk factors, including PSA levels: AUC
=0.981 vs AUC =0.704, p<.001. Conclusion: PAG was significantly associated with
the risk of clinically significant PC and outperformed other well-established PC
risk factors.
