Title: Fiber optic computing using distributed feedback
Authors: Brandon Redding, Joseph B. Murray, Joseph D. Hart, Zheyuan Zhu, Shuo S.
Pang, Raktim Sarma
ID: 2308.14504
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.14504

Abstract:
The widespread adoption of machine learning and other matrix intensive computing
algorithms has inspired renewed interest in analog optical computing, which has
the potential to perform large-scale matrix multiplications with superior energy
scaling and lower latency than digital electronics. However, most existing
optical techniques rely on spatial multiplexing to encode and process data in
parallel, requiring a large number of high-speed modulators and detectors. More
importantly, most of these architectures are restricted to performing a single
kernel convolution operation per layer. Here, we introduce a fiber-optic
computing architecture based on temporal multiplexing and distributed feedback
that performs multiple convolutions on the input data in a single layer (i.e.
grouped convolutions). Our approach relies on temporally encoding the input data
as an optical pulse train and injecting it into an optical fiber where partial
reflectors create a series of delayed copies of the input vector. In this work,
we used Rayleigh backscattering in standard single mode fiber as the partial
reflectors to encode a series of random kernel transforms. We show that this
technique effectively performs a random non-linear projection of the input data
into a higher dimensional space which can facilitate a variety of computing
tasks, including non-linear principal component analysis, support vector
machines, or extreme learning machines. By using a passive fiber to perform the
kernel transforms, this approach enables efficient energy scaling with orders of
magnitude lower power consumption than GPUs, while using a high-speed modulator
and detector maintains low latency and high data-throughput. Finally, our
approach is readily integrated with fiber-optic communication links, enabling
additional applications such as processing remote sensing data transmitted in
the analog domain.
