Title: Neuromorphic Imaging with Joint Image Deblurring and Event Denoising
Authors: Pei Zhang, Haosen Liu, Zhou Ge, Chutian Wang, Edmund Y. Lam
ID: 2309.16106
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.16106

Abstract:
Neuromorphic imaging reacts to per-pixel brightness changes of a dynamic scene
with high temporal precision and responds with asynchronous streaming events as
a result. It also often supports a simultaneous output of an intensity image.
Nevertheless, the raw events typically involve a large amount of noise due to
the high sensitivity of the sensor, while capturing fast-moving objects at low
frame rates results in blurry images. These deficiencies significantly degrade
human observation and machine processing. Fortunately, the two information
sources are inherently complementary -- events with microsecond-level temporal
resolution, which are triggered by the edges of objects recorded in a latent
sharp image, can supply rich motion details missing from the blurry one. In this
work, we bring the two types of data together and introduce a simple yet
effective unifying algorithm to jointly reconstruct blur-free images and noise-
robust events in an iterative coarse-to-fine fashion. Specifically, an event-
regularized prior offers precise high-frequency structures and dynamic features
for blind deblurring, while image gradients serve as a kind of faithful
supervision in regulating neuromorphic noise removal. Comprehensively evaluated
on real and synthetic samples, such a synergy delivers superior reconstruction
quality for both images with severe motion blur and raw event streams with a
storm of noise, and also exhibits greater robustness to challenging realistic
scenarios such as varying levels of illumination, contrast and motion magnitude.
Meanwhile, it can be driven by much fewer events and holds a competitive edge at
computational time overhead, rendering itself preferable as available computing
resources are limited. Our solution gives impetus to the improvement of both
sensing data and paves the way for highly accurate neuromorphic reasoning and
analysis.
