Title: Improving the State of the Art for Training Human-AI Teams: Technical
Report #2 -- Results of Researcher Knowledge Elicitation Survey
Authors: James E. McCarthy, Lillian Asiala, LeeAnn Maryeski, Dawn Sillars
ID: 2309.03212
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.03212

Abstract:
A consensus report produced for the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) by the
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Mathematics documented a
prevalent and increasing desire to support human-Artificial Intelligence (AI)
teaming across military service branches. Sonalysts has begun an internal
initiative to explore the training of Human-AI teams. The first step in this
effort is to develop a Synthetic Task Environment (STE) that is capable of
facilitating research on Human-AI teams. Our goal is to create a STE that offers
a task environment that could support the breadth of research that stakeholders
plan to perform within this domain. As a result, we wanted to sample the
priorities of the relevant research community broadly, and the effort documented
in this report is our initial attempt to do so. We created a survey that
featured two types of questions. The first asked respondents to report their
agreement with STE features that we anticipated might be important. The second
represented open-ended questions that asked respondents to specify their
priorities within several dimensions of the anticipated STE. The research team
invited nineteen researchers from academic and Government labs to participate,
and 11 were able to complete the survey. The team analyzed their responses to
identify themes that emerged and topics that would benefit from further
analysis. The most significant finding of the survey was that a number of
researchers felt that various open-source STEs that would meet our needs already
exist. Researchers also emphasized the need for automated transcription and
coding tools to ease the burden of assessing inter-team communications; the
importance of robust data capture and export capabilities; and the desirability
of extensive flexibility across many aspects of the tool.
