Title: Improving the State of the Art for Training Human-AI Teams: Technical
Report #1 -- Results of Subject-Matter Expert Knowledge Elicitation Survey
Authors: James E. McCarthy, Lillian Asiala, LeeAnn Maryeski, Nyla Warren
ID: 2309.03211
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.03211

Abstract:
A consensus report produced for the Air Force Research Laboratory by the
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Mathematics documented a
prevalent and increasing desire to support human-Artificial Intelligence (AI)
teaming across military service branches. Sonalysts has begun an internal
initiative to explore the training of human-AI teams. The first step in this
effort is to develop a Synthetic Task Environment (STE) that is capable of
facilitating research on human-AI teams. We decided to use Joint All-Domain
Command and Control (JADC2) as a focus point for developing the STE because the
volume of sensor inputs and decision options within the JADC2 concept likely
requires the use of AI systems to enable timely decisions. Given this focus, we
engaged a number of Subject-Matter Experts (SMEs) with Command and Control
experience to gain insight into developing a STE that embodied the teaming
challenges associated with JADC2. This report documents our initial engagement
with those stakeholders. The research team identified thirteen Sonalysts
employees with military backgrounds and Command and Control experience, and
invited them to participate. Twelve respondents completed the survey. The team
then analyzed the responses to identify themes that emerged and topics that
would benefit from further analysis. The results indicated that our SMEs were
amenable to research using tasks that were analogous to those encountered in
military environments, as long as they required teams to process a great deal of
incoming data to arrive at complex decisions. The SMEs felt that the testbed
should support 'teams of teams" that represented a matrixed organization, and
that it should support a robust array to spoken, text-based, and face-to-face
communications.
