Title: CHEX-MATE: A non-parametric deep learning technique to deproject and
deconvolve galaxy cluster X-ray temperature profiles
Authors: A. Iqbal, G. W. Pratt, J. Bobin, M. Arnaud, E. Rasia, M. Rossetti, R.
T. Duffy, I. Bartalucci, H. Bourdin, F. De Luca, M. De Petris, M. Donahue, D.
Eckert, S. Ettori, A. Ferragamo, M. Gaspari, F. Gastaldello, R. Gavazzi, S.
Ghizzardi, L. Lovisari, P. Mazzotta, B. J. Maughan, E. Pointecouteau, M. Sereno
ID: 2309.02075
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.02075

Abstract:
Temperature profiles of the hot galaxy cluster intracluster medium (ICM) have a
complex non-linear structure that traditional parametric modelling may fail to
fully approximate. For this study, we made use of neural networks, for the first
time, to construct a data-driven non-parametric model of ICM temperature
profiles. A new deconvolution algorithm was then introduced to uncover the true
(3D) temperature profiles from the observed projected (2D) temperature profiles.
An auto-encoder-inspired neural network was first trained by learning a non-
linear interpolatory scheme to build the underlying model of 3D temperature
profiles in the radial range of [0.02-2] R$_{500}$, using a sparse set of
hydrodynamical simulations from the THREE HUNDRED PROJECT. A deconvolution
algorithm using a learning-based regularisation scheme was then developed. The
model was tested using high and low resolution input temperature profiles, such
as those expected from simulations and observations, respectively. We find that
the proposed deconvolution and deprojection algorithm is robust with respect to
the quality of the data, the morphology of the cluster, and the deprojection
scheme used. The algorithm can recover unbiased 3D radial temperature profiles
with a precision of around 5\% over most of the fitting range. We apply the
method to the first sample of temperature profiles obtained with XMM{\it
-Newton} for the CHEX-MATE project and compared it to parametric deprojection
and deconvolution techniques. Our work sets the stage for future studies that
focus on the deconvolution of the thermal profiles (temperature, density,
pressure) of the ICM and the dark matter profiles in galaxy clusters, using deep
learning techniques in conjunction with X-ray, Sunyaev Zel'Dovich (SZ) and
optical datasets.
