Title: NoisyNN: Exploring the Impact of Information Entropy Change in Learning
Systems
Authors: Xiaowei Yu, Zhe Huang, Minheng Chen, Lu Zhang, Tianming Liu, Dajiang
Zhu
ID: 2309.10625
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.10625

Abstract:
We investigate the impact of entropy change in deep learning systems by noise
injection at different levels, including the embedding space and the image. The
series of models that employ our methodology are collectively known as Noisy
Neural Networks (NoisyNN), with examples such as NoisyViT and NoisyCNN. Noise is
conventionally viewed as a harmful perturbation in various deep learning
architectures, such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and vision
transformers (ViTs), as well as different learning tasks like image
classification and transfer learning. However, this work shows noise can be an
effective way to change the entropy of the learning system. We demonstrate that
specific noise can boost the performance of various deep models under certain
conditions. We theoretically prove the enhancement gained from positive noise by
reducing the task complexity defined by information entropy and experimentally
show the significant performance gain in large image datasets, such as the
ImageNet. Herein, we use the information entropy to define the complexity of the
task. We categorize the noise into two types, positive noise (PN) and harmful
noise (HN), based on whether the noise can help reduce the task complexity.
Extensive experiments of CNNs and ViTs have shown performance improvements by
proactively injecting positive noise, where we achieved an unprecedented top 1
accuracy of 95$\%$ on ImageNet. Both theoretical analysis and empirical evidence
have confirmed that the presence of positive noise, can benefit the learning
process, while the traditionally perceived harmful noise indeed impairs deep
learning models. The different roles of noise offer new explanations for deep
models on specific tasks and provide a new paradigm for improving model
performance. Moreover, it reminds us that we can influence the performance of
learning systems via information entropy change.
