Title: Expanding Mars Climate Modeling: Interpretable Machine Learning for
Modeling MSL Relative Humidity
Authors: Nour Abdelmoneim, Dattaraj B. Dhuri, Dimitra Atri, Germán Martínez
ID: 2309.01424
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.01424

Abstract:
For the past several decades, numerous attempts have been made to model the
climate of Mars with extensive studies focusing on the planet's dynamics and the
understanding of its climate. While physical modeling and data assimilation
approaches have made significant progress, uncertainties persist in
comprehensively capturing and modeling the complexities of Martian climate. In
this work, we propose a novel approach to Martian climate modeling by leveraging
machine learning techniques that have shown remarkable success in Earth climate
modeling. Our study presents a deep neural network designed to accurately model
relative humidity in Gale Crater, as measured by NASA's Mars Science Laboratory
``Curiosity'' rover. By utilizing simulated meteorological variables produced by
the Mars Planetary Climate Model, a robust Global Circulation Model, our model
accurately predicts relative humidity with a mean error of 3\% and an $R^2$
score of 0.92. Furthermore, we present an approach to predict quantile ranges of
relative humidity, catering to applications that require a range of values. To
address the challenge of interpretability associated with machine learning
models, we utilize an interpretable model architecture and conduct an in-depth
analysis of its internal mechanisms and decision making processes. We find that
our neural network can effectively model relative humidity at Gale crater using
a few meteorological variables, with the monthly mean surface H$_2$O layer,
planetary boundary layer height, convective wind speed, and solar zenith angle
being the primary contributors to the model predictions. In addition to
providing a fast and efficient method to modeling climate variables on Mars,
this modeling approach can also be used to expand on current datasets by filling
spatial and temporal gaps in observations.
