Title: On undesired emergent behaviors in compound prostate cancer detection
systems
Authors: Erlend Sortland Rolfsnes, Philip Thangngat, Trygve Eftestøl, Tobias
Nordström, Fredrik Jäderling, Martin Eklund, Alvaro Fernandez-Quilez
ID: 2309.08381
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.08381

Abstract:
Artificial intelligence systems show promise to aid in the di- agnostic pathway
of prostate cancer (PC), by supporting radiologists in interpreting magnetic
resonance images (MRI) of the prostate. Most MRI-based systems are designed to
detect clinically significant PC le- sions, with the main objective of
preventing over-diagnosis. Typically, these systems involve an automatic
prostate segmentation component and a clinically significant PC lesion detection
component. In spite of the compound nature of the systems, evaluations are
presented assum- ing a standalone clinically significant PC detection component.
That is, they are evaluated in an idealized scenario and under the assumption
that a highly accurate prostate segmentation is available at test time. In this
work, we aim to evaluate a clinically significant PC lesion de- tection system
accounting for its compound nature. For that purpose, we simulate a realistic
deployment scenario and evaluate the effect of two non-ideal and previously
validated prostate segmentation modules on the PC detection ability of the
compound system. Following, we com- pare them with an idealized setting, where
prostate segmentations are assumed to have no faults. We observe significant
differences in the de- tection ability of the compound system in a realistic
scenario and in the presence of the highest-performing prostate segmentation
module (DSC: 90.07+-0.74), when compared to the idealized one (AUC: 77.93 +-
3.06 and 84.30+- 4.07, P<.001). Our results depict the relevance of holistic
evalu- ations for PC detection compound systems, where interactions between
system components can lead to decreased performance and degradation at
deployment time.
