Title: Classical and quantum reservoir computing: development and applications
in machine learning
Authors: Laia Domingo
ID: 2310.07455
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.07455

Abstract:
Reservoir computing is a novel machine learning algorithm that uses a nonlinear
dynamical system to efficiently learn complex temporal patterns from data. The
objective of this thesis is to investigate the principles of reservoir computing
and develop state-of-the-art variants capable of addressing diverse applications
in machine learning. The research demonstrates the algorithm's robustness and
adaptability across very different domains, including agricultural time series
forecasting and the time propagation of quantum systems. The first contribution
of this thesis consists in developing a reservoir computing-based methodology to
predict future agricultural product prices, which is crucial for ensuring the
sustainability of the food market. The next contribution of the thesis is
devoted to solving the Schrödinger equation for complex quantum systems. A novel
reservoir computing framework is proposed to efficiently propagate quantum
wavefunctions in time, enabling the computation of all eigenstates of a quantum
system within a specific energy range. This approach is used to study prominent
systems in the field of quantum chemistry and quantum chaos. The last
contribution of this thesis focuses on optimizing algorithm designs for quantum
reservoir computing. The results demonstrate that families of quantum circuits
with higher complexity, according to the majorization criterion, yield superior
performance in quantum machine learning. Moreover, the impact of quantum noise
on the algorithm performance is evaluated, revealing that the amplitude damping
noise can actually be beneficial for the performance of quantum reservoir
computing, while the depolarizing and phase damping noise should be prioritized
for correction. Furthermore, the optimal design of quantum reservoirs is
employed to construct a hybrid quantum-classical neural network that tackles a
fundamental problem in drug design.
