Title: TwinPot: Digital Twin-assisted Honeypot for Cyber-Secure Smart Seaports
Authors: Yagmur Yigit, Omer Kemal Kinaci, Trung Q. Duong, Berk Canberk
ID: 2310.12880
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.12880

Abstract:
The idea of next-generation ports has become more apparent in the last ten years
in response to the challenge posed by the rising demand for efficiency and the
ever-increasing volume of goods. In this new era of intelligent infrastructure
and facilities, it is evident that cyber-security has recently received the most
significant attention from the seaport and maritime authorities, and it is a
primary concern on the agenda of most ports. Traditional security solutions can
be applied to safeguard IoT and Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) from harmful
entities. Nevertheless, security researchers can only watch, examine, and learn
about the behaviors of attackers if these solutions operate more transparently.
Herein, honeypots are potential solutions since they offer valuable information
about the attackers. It can be virtual or physical. Virtual honeypots must be
more realistic to entice attackers, necessitating better high-fidelity. To this
end, Digital Twin (DT) technology can be employed to increase the complexity and
simulation fidelity of the honeypots. Seaports can be attacked from both their
existing devices and external devices at the same time. Existing mechanisms are
insufficient to detect external attacks; therefore, the current systems cannot
handle attacks at the desired level. DT and honeypot technologies can be used
together to tackle them. Consequently, we suggest a DT-assisted honeypot, called
TwinPot, for external attacks in smart seaports. Moreover, we propose an
intelligent attack detection mechanism to handle different attack types using DT
for internal attacks. Finally, we build an extensive smart seaport dataset for
internal and external attacks using the MANSIM tool and two existing datasets to
test the performance of our system. We show that under simultaneous internal and
external attacks on the system, our solution successfully detects internal and
external attacks.
