Title: Unpacking Human-AI Interaction in Safety-Critical Industries: A
Systematic Literature Review
Authors: Tita A. Bach, Jenny K. Kristiansen, Aleksandar Babic, Alon Jacovi
ID: 2310.03392
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.03392

Abstract:
Ensuring quality human-AI interaction (HAII) in safety-critical industries is
essential. Failure to do so can lead to catastrophic and deadly consequences.
Despite this urgency, existing research on HAII is limited, fragmented, and
inconsistent. We present here a survey of that literature and recommendations
for research best practices that should improve the field. We divided our
investigation into the following areas: 1) terms used to describe HAII, 2)
primary roles of AI-enabled systems, 3) factors that influence HAII, and 4) how
HAII is measured. Additionally, we described the capabilities and maturity of
the AI-enabled systems used in safety-critical industries discussed in these
articles. We found that no single term is used across the literature to describe
HAII and some terms have multiple meanings. According to our literature, seven
factors influence HAII: user characteristics (e.g., user personality), user
perceptions and attitudes (e.g., user biases), user expectations and experience
(e.g., mismatched user expectations and experience), AI interface and features
(e.g., interactive design), AI output (e.g., perceived accuracy), explainability
and interpretability (e.g., level of detail, user understanding), and usage of
AI (e.g., heterogeneity of environments). HAII is most measured with user-
related subjective metrics (e.g., user perceptions, trust, and attitudes), and
AI-assisted decision-making is the most common primary role of AI-enabled
systems. Based on this review, we conclude that there are substantial research
gaps in HAII. Researchers and developers need to codify HAII terminology,
involve users throughout the AI lifecycle (especially during development), and
tailor HAII in safety-critical industries to the users and environments.
