Title: Forum on immune digital twins: a meeting report
Authors: Reinhard Laubenbacher, Fred Adler, Gary An, Filippo Castiglione,
Stephen Eubank, Luis L. Fonseca, James Glazier, Tomas Helikar, Marti Jett-
Tilton, Denise Kirschner, Paul Macklin, Borna Mehrad, Beth Moore, Virginia
Pasour, Ilya Shmulevich, Amber Smith, Isabel Voigt, Thomas E. Yankeelov, Tjalf
Ziemssen
ID: 2310.18374
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.18374

Abstract:
Medical digital twins are computational models of human biology relevant to a
given medical condition, which can be tailored to an individual patient, thereby
predicting the course of disease and individualized treatments, an important
goal of personalized medicine. The immune system, which has a central role in
many diseases, is highly heterogeneous between individuals, and thus poses a
major challenge for this technology. If medical digital twins are to faithfully
capture the characteristics of a patient's immune system, we need to answer many
questions, such as: What do we need to know about the immune system to build
mathematical models that reflect features of an individual? What data do we need
to collect across the different scales of immune system action? What are the
right modeling paradigms to properly capture immune system complexity? In
February 2023, an international group of experts convened in Lake Nona, FL for
two days to discuss these and other questions related to digital twins of the
immune system. The group consisted of clinicians, immunologists, biologists, and
mathematical modelers, representative of the interdisciplinary nature of medical
digital twin development. A video recording of the entire event is available.
This paper presents a synopsis of the discussions, brief descriptions of ongoing
digital twin projects at different stages of progress. It also proposes a 5-year
action plan for further developing this technology. The main recommendations are
to identify and pursue a small number of promising use cases, to develop
stimulation-specific assays of immune function in a clinical setting, and to
develop a database of existing computational immune models, as well as advanced
modeling technology and infrastructure.
