Title: Generative Artificial Intelligence for Software Engineering -- A Research
Agenda
Authors: Anh Nguyen-Duc, Beatriz Cabrero-Daniel, Adam Przybylek, Chetan Arora,
Dron Khanna, Tomas Herda, Usman Rafiq, Jorge Melegati, Eduardo Guerra, Kai-
Kristian Kemell, Mika Saari, Zheying Zhang, Huy Le, Tho Quan, Pekka Abrahamsson
ID: 2310.18648
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.18648

Abstract:
Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) tools have become increasingly
prevalent in software development, offering assistance to various managerial and
technical project activities. Notable examples of these tools include OpenAIs
ChatGPT, GitHub Copilot, and Amazon CodeWhisperer. Although many recent
publications have explored and evaluated the application of GenAI, a
comprehensive understanding of the current development, applications,
limitations, and open challenges remains unclear to many. Particularly, we do
not have an overall picture of the current state of GenAI technology in
practical software engineering usage scenarios. We conducted a literature review
and focus groups for a duration of five months to develop a research agenda on
GenAI for Software Engineering. We identified 78 open Research Questions (RQs)
in 11 areas of Software Engineering. Our results show that it is possible to
explore the adoption of GenAI in partial automation and support decision-making
in all software development activities. While the current literature is skewed
toward software implementation, quality assurance and software maintenance,
other areas, such as requirements engineering, software design, and software
engineering education, would need further research attention. Common
considerations when implementing GenAI include industry-level assessment,
dependability and accuracy, data accessibility, transparency, and sustainability
aspects associated with the technology. GenAI is bringing significant changes to
the field of software engineering. Nevertheless, the state of research on the
topic still remains immature. We believe that this research agenda holds
significance and practical value for informing both researchers and
practitioners about current applications and guiding future research.
