Title: SAGUARO: Time-domain Infrastructure for the Fourth Gravitational-wave
Observing Run and Beyond
Authors: Griffin Hosseinzadeh, Kerry Paterson, Jillian C. Rastinejad, Manisha
Shrestha, Philip N. Daly, Michael J. Lundquist, David J. Sand, Wen-fai Fong, K.
Azalee Bostroem, Saarah Hall, Samuel D. Wyatt, Alex R. Gibbs, Eric Christensen,
William Lindstrom, Jonathan Nation, Joseph Chatelain, Curtis McCully
ID: 2310.08624
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08624

Abstract:
We present upgraded infrastructure for Searches after Gravitational Waves Using
ARizona Observatories (SAGUARO) during LIGO, Virgo, and KAGRA's fourth
gravitational-wave (GW) observing run (O4). These upgrades implement many of the
lessons we learned after a comprehensive analysis of potential electromagnetic
counterparts to the GWs discovered during the previous observing run. We have
developed a new web-based target and observation manager (TOM) that allows us to
coordinate sky surveys, vet potential counterparts, and trigger follow-up
observations from one centralized portal. The TOM includes software that
aggregates all publicly available information on the light curves and possible
host galaxies of targets, allowing us to rule out potential contaminants like
active galactic nuclei, variable stars, solar-system objects, and preexisting
supernovae, as well as to assess the viability of any plausible counterparts. We
have also upgraded our image-subtraction pipeline by assembling deeper reference
images and training a new neural network-based real-bogus classifier. These
infrastructure upgrades will aid coordination by enabling the prompt reporting
of observations, discoveries, and analysis to the GW follow-up community, and
put SAGUARO in an advantageous position to discover kilonovae in the remainder
of O4 and beyond. Many elements of our open-source software stack have broad
utility beyond multimessenger astronomy, and will be particularly relevant in
the "big data" era of transient discoveries by the Vera C. Rubin Observatory.
