Title: Wafer-scale Computing: Advancements, Challenges, and Future Perspectives
Authors: Yang Hu, Xinhan Lin, Huizheng Wang, Zhen He, Xingmao Yu, Jiahao Zhang,
Qize Yang, Zheng Xu, Sihan Guan, Jiahao Fang, Haoran Shang, Xinru Tang, Xu Dai,
Shaojun Wei, Shouyi Yin
ID: 2310.09568
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.09568

Abstract:
Nowadays, artificial intelligence (AI) technology with large models plays an
increasingly important role in both academia and industry. It also brings a
rapidly increasing demand for the computing power of the hardware. As the
computing demand for AI continues to grow, the growth of hardware computing
power has failed to keep up. This has become a significant factor restricting
the development of AI. The augmentation of hardware computing power is mainly
propelled by the escalation of transistor density and chip area. However, the
former is impeded by the termination of the Moore's Law and Dennard scaling, and
the latter is significantly restricted by the challenge of disrupting the legacy
fabrication equipment and process.
  In recent years, advanced packaging technologies that have gradually matured
are increasingly used to implement bigger chips that integrate multiple
chiplets, while still providing interconnections with chip-level density and
bandwidth. Compared to conventional high-performance computing paradigms such as
multi-accelerator and datacenter-scale computing, Wafer-scale Computing shows
remarkable advantages in communication bandwidth, integration density, and
programmability potential. Not surprisingly, disruptive Wafer-scale Computing
also brings unprecedented design challenges for hardware architecture, design-
system-technology co-optimization, power and cooling systems, and compiler tool
chain. At present, there are no comprehensive surveys summarizing the current
state and design insights of Wafer-scale Computing. This paper aims to take the
first step to help academia and industry review existing wafer-scale chips and
essential technologies in a one-stop manner. So that people can conveniently
grasp the basic knowledge and key points, understand the achievements and
shortcomings of existing research, and contribute to this promising research
direction.
