Title: Efficient training sets for surrogate models of tokamak turbulence with
Active Deep Ensembles
Authors: L. Zanisi, A. Ho, T. Madula, J. Barr, J. Citrin, S. Pamela, J.
Buchanan, F. Casson, V. Gopakumar, JET contributors
ID: 2310.09024
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.09024

Abstract:
Model-based plasma scenario development lies at the heart of the design and
operation of future fusion powerplants. Including turbulent transport in
integrated models is essential for delivering a successful roadmap towards
operation of ITER and the design of DEMO-class devices. Given the highly
iterative nature of integrated models, fast machine-learning-based surrogates of
turbulent transport are fundamental to fulfil the pressing need for faster
simulations opening up pulse design, optimization, and flight simulator
applications. A significant bottleneck is the generation of suitably large
training datasets covering a large volume in parameter space, which can be
prohibitively expensive to obtain for higher fidelity codes.
  In this work, we propose ADEPT (Active Deep Ensembles for Plasma Turbulence),
a physics-informed, two-stage Active Learning strategy to ease this challenge.
Active Learning queries a given model by means of an acquisition function that
identifies regions where additional data would improve the surrogate model. We
provide a benchmark study using available data from the literature for the
QuaLiKiz quasilinear transport model. We demonstrate quantitatively that the
physics-informed nature of the proposed workflow reduces the need to perform
simulations in stable regions of the parameter space, resulting in significantly
improved data efficiency. We show an up to a factor of 20 reduction in training
dataset size needed to achieve the same performance as random sampling. We then
validate the surrogates on multichannel integrated modelling of ITG-dominated
JET scenarios and demonstrate that they recover the performance of QuaLiKiz to
better than 10\%. This matches the performance obtained in previous work, but
with two orders of magnitude fewer training data points.
