Title: A deformation-based morphometry framework for disentangling Alzheimer's
disease from normal aging using learned normal aging templates
Authors: Jingru Fu, Daniel Ferreira, Örjan Smedby, Rodrigo Moreno
ID: 2311.08176
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.08176

Abstract:
Alzheimer's Disease and normal aging are both characterized by brain atrophy.
The question of whether AD-related brain atrophy represents accelerated aging or
a neurodegeneration process distinct from that in normal aging remains
unresolved. Moreover, precisely disentangling AD-related brain atrophy from
normal aging in a clinical context is complex. In this study, we propose a
deformation-based morphometry framework to estimate normal aging and AD-specific
atrophy patterns of subjects from morphological MRI scans. We first leverage
deep-learning-based methods to create age-dependent templates of cognitively
normal (CN) subjects. These templates model the normal aging atrophy patterns in
a CN population. Then, we use the learned diffeomorphic registration to estimate
the one-year normal aging pattern at the voxel level. We register the testing
image to the 60-year-old CN template in the second step. Finally, normal aging
and AD-specific scores are estimated by measuring the alignment of this
registration with the one-year normal aging pattern. The methodology was
developed and evaluated on the OASIS3 dataset with 1,014 T1-weighted MRI scans.
Of these, 326 scans were from CN subjects, and 688 scans were from individuals
clinically diagnosed with AD at different stages of clinical severity defined by
clinical dementia rating (CDR) scores. The results show that ventricles
predominantly follow an accelerated normal aging pattern in subjects with AD. In
turn, hippocampi and amygdala regions were affected by both normal aging and AD-
specific factors. Interestingly, hippocampi and amygdala regions showed more of
an accelerated normal aging pattern for subjects during the early clinical
stages of the disease, while the AD-specific score increases in later clinical
stages. Our code is freely available at https://github.com/Fjr9516/DBM_with_DL.
