Title: Deep Neuromorphic Networks with Superconducting Single Flux Quanta
Authors: Gleb Krylov, Alexander J. Edwards, Joseph S. Friedman, Eby G. Friedman
ID: 2311.10721
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.10721

Abstract:
Conventional semiconductor-based integrated circuits are gradually approaching
fundamental scaling limits. Many prospective solutions have recently emerged to
supplement or replace both the technology on which basic devices are built and
the architecture of data processing. Neuromorphic circuits are a promising
approach to computing where techniques used by the brain to achieve high
efficiency are exploited. Many existing neuromorphic circuits rely on
unconventional and useful properties of novel technologies to better mimic the
operation of the brain. One such technology is single flux quantum (SFQ) logic
-- a cryogenic superconductive technology in which the data are represented by
quanta of magnetic flux (fluxons) produced and processed by Josephson junctions
embedded within inductive loops. The movement of a fluxon within a circuit
produces a quantized voltage pulse (SFQ pulse), resembling a neuronal spiking
event. These circuits routinely operate at clock frequencies of tens to hundreds
of gigahertz, making SFQ a natural technology for processing high frequency
pulse trains.
  Prior proposals for SFQ neural networks often require energy-expensive fluxon
conversions, involve heterogeneous technologies, or exclusively focus on device
level behavior. In this paper, a design methodology for deep single flux quantum
neuromorphic networks is presented. Synaptic and neuronal circuits based on SFQ
technology are presented and characterized. Based on these primitives, a deep
neuromorphic XOR network is evaluated as a case study, both at the architectural
and circuit levels, achieving wide classification margins. The proposed
methodology does not employ unconventional superconductive devices or
semiconductor transistors. The resulting networks are tunable by an external
current, making this proposed system an effective approach for scalable
cryogenic neuromorphic computing.
