Title: Responsible Emergent Multi-Agent Behavior
Authors: Niko A. Grupen
ID: 2311.01609
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.01609

Abstract:
Responsible AI has risen to the forefront of the AI research community. As
neural network-based learning algorithms continue to permeate real-world
applications, the field of Responsible AI has played a large role in ensuring
that such systems maintain a high-level of human-compatibility. Despite this
progress, the state of the art in Responsible AI has ignored one crucial point:
human problems are multi-agent problems. Predominant approaches largely consider
the performance of a single AI system in isolation, but human problems are, by
their very nature, multi-agent. From driving in traffic to negotiating economic
policy, human problem-solving involves interaction and the interplay of the
actions and motives of multiple individuals.
  This dissertation develops the study of responsible emergent multi-agent
behavior, illustrating how researchers and practitioners can better understand
and shape multi-agent learning with respect to three pillars of Responsible AI:
interpretability, fairness, and robustness. First, I investigate multi-agent
interpretability, presenting novel techniques for understanding emergent multi-
agent behavior at multiple levels of granularity. With respect to low-level
interpretability, I examine the extent to which implicit communication emerges
as an aid to coordination in multi-agent populations. I introduce a novel
curriculum-driven method for learning high-performing policies in difficult,
sparse reward environments and show through a measure of position-based social
influence that multi-agent teams that learn sophisticated coordination
strategies exchange significantly more information through implicit signals than
lesser-coordinated agents. Then, at a high-level, I study concept-based
interpretability in the context of multi-agent learning. I propose a novel
method for learning intrinsically interpretable, concept-based policies and show
that it enables...
