Title: FLOGA: A machine learning ready dataset, a benchmark and a novel deep
learning model for burnt area mapping with Sentinel-2
Authors: Maria Sdraka, Alkinoos Dimakos, Alexandros Malounis, Zisoula Ntasiou,
Konstantinos Karantzalos, Dimitrios Michail, Ioannis Papoutsis
ID: 2311.03339
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.03339

Abstract:
Over the last decade there has been an increasing frequency and intensity of
wildfires across the globe, posing significant threats to human and animal
lives, ecosystems, and socio-economic stability. Therefore urgent action is
required to mitigate their devastating impact and safeguard Earth's natural
resources. Robust Machine Learning methods combined with the abundance of high-
resolution satellite imagery can provide accurate and timely mappings of the
affected area in order to assess the scale of the event, identify the impacted
assets and prioritize and allocate resources effectively for the proper
restoration of the damaged region. In this work, we create and introduce a
machine-learning ready dataset we name FLOGA (Forest wiLdfire Observations for
the Greek Area). This dataset is unique as it comprises of satellite imagery
acquired before and after a wildfire event, it contains information from
Sentinel-2 and MODIS modalities with variable spatial and spectral resolution,
and contains a large number of events where the corresponding burnt area ground
truth has been annotated by domain experts. FLOGA covers the wider region of
Greece, which is characterized by a Mediterranean landscape and climatic
conditions. We use FLOGA to provide a thorough comparison of multiple Machine
Learning and Deep Learning algorithms for the automatic extraction of burnt
areas, approached as a change detection task. We also compare the results to
those obtained using standard specialized spectral indices for burnt area
mapping. Finally, we propose a novel Deep Learning model, namely BAM-CD. Our
benchmark results demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed technique in the
automatic extraction of burnt areas, outperforming all other methods in terms of
accuracy and robustness. Our dataset and code are publicly available at:
https://github.com/Orion-AI-Lab/FLOGA.
