Title: On the origin of force sensitivity in tests of quantum gravity with
delocalised mechanical systems
Authors: Julen S. Pedernales, Martin B. Plenio
ID: 2311.04745
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.04745

Abstract:
The detection of the quantum nature of gravity in the low-energy limit hinges on
achieving an unprecedented degree of force sensitivity with mechanical systems.
Against this background, we explore the relationship between the sensitivity of
mechanical systems to external forces and the properties of the quantum states
they are prepared in. We establish that the main determinant of the force
sensitivity in pure quantum states is their spatial delocalisation and we link
the force sensitivity to the rate at which two mechanical systems become
entangled under a quantum force. We exemplify this at the hand of two commonly
considered configurations. One that involves gravitationally interacting objects
prepared in non-Gaussian states such as Schrödinger-cat states, where the
generation of entanglement is typically ascribed to the accumulation of a
dynamical phase between components in superposition. The other prepares
particles in Gaussian states that are strongly squeezed in momentum and
delocalised in position where entanglement generation is attributed to
accelerations. We offer a unified description of these two arrangements using
the phase-space representation and link their entangling rate to their force
sensitivity, showing that both configurations get entangled at the same rate
provided that they are equally delocalised in space. Our description in phase
space and the established relation between force sensitivity and entanglement
sheds light on the intricacies of why the equivalence between these two
configurations holds, something that is not always evident in the literature,
due to the distinct physical and analytical methods employed to study each of
them. Notably, we demonstrate that while the conventional computation of
entanglement via the dynamical phase remains accurate for Schrödinger-cat
states, it yields erroneous estimations for systems in squeezed cat states.
