Title: Accelerating material discovery with a threshold-driven hybrid
acquisition policy-based Bayesian optimization
Authors: Ahmed Shoyeb Raihan, Hamed Khosravi, Srinjoy Das, Imtiaz Ahmed
ID: 2311.09591
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.09591

Abstract:
Advancements in materials play a crucial role in technological progress.
However, the process of discovering and developing materials with desired
properties is often impeded by substantial experimental costs, extensive
resource utilization, and lengthy development periods. To address these
challenges, modern approaches often employ machine learning (ML) techniques such
as Bayesian Optimization (BO), which streamline the search for optimal materials
by iteratively selecting experiments that are most likely to yield beneficial
results. However, traditional BO methods, while beneficial, often struggle with
balancing the trade-off between exploration and exploitation, leading to sub-
optimal performance in material discovery processes. This paper introduces a
novel Threshold-Driven UCB-EI Bayesian Optimization (TDUE-BO) method, which
dynamically integrates the strengths of Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) and
Expected Improvement (EI) acquisition functions to optimize the material
discovery process. Unlike the classical BO, our method focuses on efficiently
navigating the high-dimensional material design space (MDS). TDUE-BO begins with
an exploration-focused UCB approach, ensuring a comprehensive initial sweep of
the MDS. As the model gains confidence, indicated by reduced uncertainty, it
transitions to the more exploitative EI method, focusing on promising areas
identified earlier. The UCB-to-EI switching policy dictated guided through
continuous monitoring of the model uncertainty during each step of sequential
sampling results in navigating through the MDS more efficiently while ensuring
rapid convergence. The effectiveness of TDUE-BO is demonstrated through its
application on three different material datasets, showing significantly better
approximation and optimization performance over the EI and UCB-based BO methods
in terms of the RMSE scores and convergence efficiency, respectively.
