Title: REAL: Resilience and Adaptation using Large Language Models on Autonomous
Aerial Robots
Authors: Andrea Tagliabue, Kota Kondo, Tong Zhao, Mason Peterson, Claudius T.
Tewari, Jonathan P. How
ID: 2311.01403
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.01403

Abstract:
Large Language Models (LLMs) pre-trained on internet-scale datasets have shown
impressive capabilities in code understanding, synthesis, and general purpose
question-and-answering. Key to their performance is the substantial prior
knowledge acquired during training and their ability to reason over extended
sequences of symbols, often presented in natural language. In this work, we aim
to harness the extensive long-term reasoning, natural language comprehension,
and the available prior knowledge of LLMs for increased resilience and
adaptation in autonomous mobile robots. We introduce REAL, an approach for
REsilience and Adaptation using LLMs. REAL provides a strategy to employ LLMs as
a part of the mission planning and control framework of an autonomous robot. The
LLM employed by REAL provides (i) a source of prior knowledge to increase
resilience for challenging scenarios that the system had not been explicitly
designed for; (ii) a way to interpret natural-language and other log/diagnostic
information available in the autonomy stack, for mission planning; (iii) a way
to adapt the control inputs using minimal user-provided prior knowledge about
the dynamics/kinematics of the robot. We integrate REAL in the autonomy stack of
a real multirotor, querying onboard an offboard LLM at 0.1-1.0 Hz as part the
robot's mission planning and control feedback loops. We demonstrate in real-
world experiments the ability of the LLM to reduce the position tracking errors
of a multirotor under the presence of (i) errors in the parameters of the
controller and (ii) unmodeled dynamics. We also show (iii) decision making to
avoid potentially dangerous scenarios (e.g., robot oscillates) that had not been
explicitly accounted for in the initial prompt design.
