Title: ShipGen: A Diffusion Model for Parametric Ship Hull Generation with
Multiple Objectives and Constraints
Authors: Noah J. Bagazinski, Faez Ahmed
ID: 2311.06315
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.06315

Abstract:
Ship design is a years-long process that requires balancing complex design
trade-offs to create a ship that is efficient and effective. Finding new ways to
improve the ship design process can lead to significant cost savings for ship
building and operation. One promising technology is generative artificial
intelligence, which has been shown to reduce design cycle time and create novel,
high-performing designs. In literature review, generative artificial
intelligence has been shown to generate ship hulls; however, ship design is
particularly difficult as the hull of a ship requires the consideration of many
objectives. This paper presents a study on the generation of parametric ship
hull designs using a parametric diffusion model that considers multiple
objectives and constraints for the hulls. This denoising diffusion probabilistic
model (DDPM) generates the tabular parametric design vectors of a ship hull for
evaluation. In addition to a tabular DDPM, this paper details adding guidance to
improve the quality of generated ship hull designs. By leveraging classifier
guidance, the DDPM produced feasible parametric ship hulls that maintain the
coverage of the initial training dataset of ship hulls with a 99.5% rate, a 149x
improvement over random sampling of the design vector parameters across the
design space. Parametric ship hulls produced with performance guidance saw an
average of 91.4% reduction in wave drag coefficients and an average of a 47.9x
relative increase in the total displaced volume of the hulls compared to the
mean performance of the hulls in the training dataset. The use of a DDPM to
generate parametric ship hulls can reduce design time by generating high-
performing hull designs for future analysis. These generated hulls have low drag
and high volume, which can reduce the cost of operating a ship and increase its
potential to generate revenue.
