Title: Towards Efficient Hyperdimensional Computing Using Photonics
Authors: Farbin Fayza, Cansu Demirkiran, Hanning Chen, Che-Kai Liu, Avi Mohan,
Hamza Errahmouni, Sanggeon Yun, Mohsen Imani, David Zhang, Darius Bunandar, Ajay
Joshi
ID: 2311.17801
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.17801

Abstract:
Over the past few years, silicon photonics-based computing has emerged as a
promising alternative to CMOS-based computing for Deep Neural Networks (DNN).
Unfortunately, the non-linear operations and the high-precision requirements of
DNNs make it extremely challenging to design efficient silicon photonics-based
systems for DNN inference and training. Hyperdimensional Computing (HDC) is an
emerging, brain-inspired machine learning technique that enjoys several
advantages over existing DNNs, including being lightweight, requiring low-
precision operands, and being robust to noise introduced by the nonidealities in
the hardware. For HDC, computing in-memory (CiM) approaches have been widely
used, as CiM reduces the data transfer cost if the operands can fit into the
memory. However, inefficient multi-bit operations, high write latency, and low
endurance make CiM ill-suited for HDC. On the other hand, the existing electro-
photonic DNN accelerators are inefficient for HDC because they are specifically
optimized for matrix multiplication in DNNs and consume a lot of power with
high-precision data converters.
  In this paper, we argue that photonic computing and HDC complement each other
better than photonic computing and DNNs, or CiM and HDC. We propose PhotoHDC,
the first-ever electro-photonic accelerator for HDC training and inference,
supporting the basic, record-based, and graph encoding schemes. Evaluating with
popular datasets, we show that our accelerator can achieve two to five orders of
magnitude lower EDP than the state-of-the-art electro-photonic DNN accelerators
for implementing HDC training and inference. PhotoHDC also achieves four orders
of magnitude lower energy-delay product than CiM-based accelerators for both HDC
training and inference.
