Title: Leveraging Artificial Intelligence Technology for Mapping Research to
Sustainable Development Goals: A Case Study
Authors: Hui Yin, Amir Aryani, Gavin Lambert, Marcus White, Luis Salvador-
Carulla, Shazia Sadiq, Elvira Sojli, Jennifer Boddy, Greg Murray, Wing Wah Tham
ID: 2311.16162
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.16162

Abstract:
The number of publications related to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
continues to grow. These publications cover a diverse spectrum of research, from
humanities and social sciences to engineering and health. Given the imperative
of funding bodies to monitor outcomes and impacts, linking publications to
relevant SDGs is critical but remains time-consuming and difficult given the
breadth and complexity of the SDGs. A publication may relate to several goals
(interconnection feature of goals), and therefore require multidisciplinary
knowledge to tag accurately. Machine learning approaches are promising and have
proven particularly valuable for tasks such as manual data labeling and text
classification. In this study, we employed over 82,000 publications from an
Australian university as a case study. We utilized a similarity measure to map
these publications onto Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Additionally, we
leveraged the OpenAI GPT model to conduct the same task, facilitating a
comparative analysis between the two approaches. Experimental results show that
about 82.89% of the results obtained by the similarity measure overlap (at least
one tag) with the outputs of the GPT model. The adopted model (similarity
measure) can complement GPT model for SDG classification. Furthermore, deep
learning methods, which include the similarity measure used here, are more
accessible and trusted for dealing with sensitive data without the use of
commercial AI services or the deployment of expensive computing resources to
operate large language models. Our study demonstrates how a crafted combination
of the two methods can achieve reliable results for mapping research to the
SDGs.
