Title: RAISE -- Radiology AI Safety, an End-to-end lifecycle approach
Authors: M. Jorge Cardoso, Julia Moosbauer, Tessa S. Cook, B. Selnur Erdal, Brad
Genereaux, Vikash Gupta, Bennett A. Landman, Tiarna Lee, Parashkev Nachev,
Elanchezhian Somasundaram, Ronald M. Summers, Khaled Younis, Sebastien Ourselin,
Franz MJ Pfister
ID: 2311.14570
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.14570

Abstract:
The integration of AI into radiology introduces opportunities for improved
clinical care provision and efficiency but it demands a meticulous approach to
mitigate potential risks as with any other new technology. Beginning with
rigorous pre-deployment evaluation and validation, the focus should be on
ensuring models meet the highest standards of safety, effectiveness and efficacy
for their intended applications. Input and output guardrails implemented during
production usage act as an additional layer of protection, identifying and
addressing individual failures as they occur. Continuous post-deployment
monitoring allows for tracking population-level performance (data drift),
fairness, and value delivery over time. Scheduling reviews of post-deployment
model performance and educating radiologists about new algorithmic-driven
findings is critical for AI to be effective in clinical practice. Recognizing
that no single AI solution can provide absolute assurance even when limited to
its intended use, the synergistic application of quality assurance at multiple
levels - regulatory, clinical, technical, and ethical - is emphasized.
Collaborative efforts between stakeholders spanning healthcare systems,
industry, academia, and government are imperative to address the multifaceted
challenges involved. Trust in AI is an earned privilege, contingent on a broad
set of goals, among them transparently demonstrating that the AI adheres to the
same rigorous safety, effectiveness and efficacy standards as other established
medical technologies. By doing so, developers can instil confidence among
providers and patients alike, enabling the responsible scaling of AI and the
realization of its potential benefits. The roadmap presented herein aims to
expedite the achievement of deployable, reliable, and safe AI in radiology.
