Title: Photonics for Neuromorphic Computing: Fundamentals, Devices, and
Opportunities
Authors: Renjie Li, Yuanhao Gong, Hai Huang, Yuze Zhou, Sixuan Mao, Zhijian Wei,
Zhaoyu Zhang
ID: 2311.09767
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.09767

Abstract:
In the dynamic landscape of Artificial Intelligence (AI), two notable phenomena
are becoming predominant: the exponential growth of large AI model sizes and the
explosion of massive amount of data. Meanwhile, scientific research such as
quantum computing and protein synthesis increasingly demand higher computing
capacities. Neuromorphic computing, inspired by the mechanism and functionality
of human brains, uses physical artificial neurons to do computations and is
drawing widespread attention. Conventional electronic computing has experienced
certain difficulties, particularly concerning the latency, crosstalk, and energy
consumption of digital processors. As the Moore's law approaches its terminus,
there is a urgent need for alternative computing architectures that can satisfy
this growing computing demand and break through the von Neumann model. Recently,
the expansion of optoelectronic devices on photonic integration platforms has
led to significant growth in photonic computing, where photonic integrated
circuits (PICs) have enabled ultrafast artificial neural networks (ANN) with
sub-nanosecond latencies, low heat dissipation, and high parallelism. Such non-
von Neumann photonic computing systems hold the promise to cater to the
escalating requirements of AI and scientific computing. In this review, we study
recent advancements in integrated photonic neuromorphic systems, and from the
perspective of materials and device engineering, we lay out the scientific and
technological breakthroughs necessary to advance the state-of-the-art. In
particular, we examine various technologies and devices employed in neuromorphic
photonic AI accelerators, spanning from traditional optics to PICs. We evaluate
the performances of different designs by energy efficiency in operations per
joule (OP/J) and compute density in operations per squared millimeter per ...
