Title: Decoding Social Sentiment in DAO: A Comparative Analysis of Blockchain
Governance Communities
Authors: Yutong Quan, Xintong Wu, Wanlin Deng, Luyao Zhang
ID: 2311.14676
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.14676

Abstract:
Blockchain technology is leading a revolutionary transformation across diverse
industries, with effective governance being critical for the success and
sustainability of blockchain projects. Community forums, pivotal in engaging
decentralized autonomous organizations (DAOs), significantly impact blockchain
governance decisions. Concurrently, Natural Language Processing (NLP),
particularly sentiment analysis, provides powerful insights from textual data.
While prior research has explored the potential of NLP tools in social media
sentiment analysis, there is a gap in understanding the sentiment landscape of
blockchain governance communities. The evolving discourse and sentiment dynamics
on the forums of top DAOs remain largely unknown. This paper delves deep into
the evolving discourse and sentiment dynamics on the public forums of leading
DeFi projects: Aave, Uniswap, Curve DAO, Yearn.finance, Merit Circle, and
Balancer, focusing primarily on discussions related to governance issues. Our
study shows that participants in decentralized communities generally express
positive sentiments during Discord discussions. Furthermore, there is a
potential interaction between discussion intensity and sentiment dynamics;
higher discussion volume may contribute to a more stable sentiment from code
analysis. The insights gained from this study are valuable for decision-makers
in blockchain governance, underscoring the pivotal role of sentiment analysis in
interpreting community emotions and its evolving impact on the landscape of
blockchain governance. This research significantly contributes to the
interdisciplinary exploration of the intersection of blockchain and society,
specifically emphasizing the decentralized blockchain governance ecosystem. We
provide our data and code for replicability as open access on GitHub.
