Title: Verified Compositional Neuro-Symbolic Control for Stochastic Systems with
Temporal Logic Tasks
Authors: Jun Wang, Haojun Chen, Zihe Sun, Yiannis Kantaros
ID: 2311.10863
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.10863

Abstract:
Several methods have been proposed recently to learn neural network (NN)
controllers for autonomous agents, with unknown and stochastic dynamics, tasked
with complex missions captured by Linear Temporal Logic (LTL). Due to the
sample-inefficiency of the majority of these works, compositional learning
methods have been proposed decomposing the LTL specification into smaller sub-
tasks. Then, separate controllers are learned and composed to satisfy the
original task. A key challenge within these approaches is that they often lack
safety guarantees or the provided guarantees are impractical. This paper aims to
address this challenge. Particularly, we consider autonomous systems with
unknown and stochastic dynamics and LTL-encoded tasks. We assume that the system
is equipped with a finite set of base skills modeled by trained NN feedback
controllers. Our goal is to check if there exists a temporal composition of the
trained NN controllers - and if so, to compute it - that will yield a composite
system behavior that satisfies the assigned LTL task with probability one. We
propose a new approach that relies on a novel integration of automata theory and
data-driven reachability analysis tools for NN-controlled stochastic systems.
The resulting neuro-symbolic controller allows the agent to generate safe
behaviors for unseen complex temporal logic tasks in a zero-shot fashion by
leveraging its base skills. We show correctness of the proposed method and we
provide conditions under which it is complete. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first work that designs verified temporal compositions of NN
controllers for unknown and stochastic systems. Finally, we provide extensive
numerical simulations and hardware experiments on robot navigation tasks to
demonstrate the proposed method.
