Title: Predicting the Probability of Collision of a Satellite with Space Debris:
A Bayesian Machine Learning Approach
Authors: João Simões Catulo, Cláudia Soares, Marta Guimarães
ID: 2311.10633
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.10633

Abstract:
Space is becoming more crowded in Low Earth Orbit due to increased space
activity. Such a dense space environment increases the risk of collisions
between space objects endangering the whole space population. Therefore, the
need to consider collision avoidance as part of routine operations is evident to
satellite operators. Current procedures rely on the analysis of multiple
collision warnings by human analysts. However, with the continuous growth of the
space population, this manual approach may become unfeasible, highlighting the
importance of automation in risk assessment. In 2019, ESA launched a competition
to study the feasibility of applying machine learning in collision risk
estimation and released a dataset that contained sequences of Conjunction Data
Messages (CDMs) in support of real close encounters. The competition results
showed that the naive forecast and its variants are strong predictors for this
problem, which suggests that the CDMs may follow the Markov property. The
proposed work investigates this theory by benchmarking Hidden Markov Models
(HMM) in predicting the risk of collision between two resident space objects by
using one feature of the entire dataset: the sequence of the probability in the
CDMs. In addition, Bayesian statistics are used to infer a joint distribution
for the parameters of the models, which allows the development of robust and
reliable probabilistic predictive models that can incorporate physical or prior
knowledge about the problem within a rigorous theoretical framework and provides
prediction uncertainties that nicely reflect the accuracy of the predicted risk.
This work shows that the implemented HMM outperforms the naive solution in some
metrics, which further adds to the idea that the collision warnings may be
Markovian and suggests that this is a powerful method to be further explored.
