Title: Designing Interpretable ML System to Enhance Trust in Healthcare: A
Systematic Review to Proposed Responsible Clinician-AI-Collaboration Framework
Authors: Elham Nasarian, Roohallah Alizadehsani, U. Rajendra Acharya, Kwok-Leung
Tsui
ID: 2311.11055
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.11055

Abstract:
This paper explores the significant impact of AI-based medical devices,
including wearables, telemedicine, large language models, and digital twins, on
clinical decision support systems. It emphasizes the importance of producing
outcomes that are not only accurate but also interpretable and understandable to
clinicians, addressing the risk that lack of interpretability poses in terms of
mistrust and reluctance to adopt these technologies in healthcare. The paper
reviews interpretable AI processes, methods, applications, and the challenges of
implementation in healthcare, focusing on quality control to facilitate
responsible communication between AI systems and clinicians. It breaks down the
interpretability process into data pre-processing, model selection, and post-
processing, aiming to foster a comprehensive understanding of the crucial role
of a robust interpretability approach in healthcare and to guide future research
in this area. with insights for creating responsible clinician-AI tools for
healthcare, as well as to offer a deeper understanding of the challenges they
might face. Our research questions, eligibility criteria and primary goals were
identified using Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-
Analyses guideline and PICO method; PubMed, Scopus and Web of Science databases
were systematically searched using sensitive and specific search strings. In the
end, 52 publications were selected for data extraction which included 8 existing
reviews and 44 related experimental studies. The paper offers general concepts
of interpretable AI in healthcare and discuss three-levels interpretability
process. Additionally, it provides a comprehensive discussion of evaluating
robust interpretability AI in healthcare. Moreover, this survey introduces a
step-by-step roadmap for implementing responsible AI in healthcare.
