Title: Learning Curricula in Open-Ended Worlds
Authors: Minqi Jiang
ID: 2312.03126
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.03126

Abstract:
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) provides powerful methods for training optimal
sequential decision-making agents. As collecting real-world interactions can
entail additional costs and safety risks, the common paradigm of sim2real
conducts training in a simulator, followed by real-world deployment.
Unfortunately, RL agents easily overfit to the choice of simulated training
environments, and worse still, learning ends when the agent masters the specific
set of simulated environments. In contrast, the real world is highly open-ended,
featuring endlessly evolving environments and challenges, making such RL
approaches unsuitable. Simply randomizing over simulated environments is
insufficient, as it requires making arbitrary distributional assumptions and can
be combinatorially less likely to sample specific environment instances that are
useful for learning. An ideal learning process should automatically adapt the
training environment to maximize the learning potential of the agent over an
open-ended task space that matches or surpasses the complexity of the real
world. This thesis develops a class of methods called Unsupervised Environment
Design (UED), which aim to produce such open-ended processes. Given an
environment design space, UED automatically generates an infinite sequence or
curriculum of training environments at the frontier of the learning agent's
capabilities. Through extensive empirical studies and theoretical arguments
founded on minimax-regret decision theory and game theory, the findings in this
thesis show that UED autocurricula can produce RL agents exhibiting
significantly improved robustness and generalization to previously unseen
environment instances. Such autocurricula are promising paths toward open-ended
learning systems that achieve more general intelligence by continually
generating and mastering additional challenges of their own design.
