Title: Automated detection of Zika and dengue in Aedes aegypti using neural
spiking analysis
Authors: Danial Sharifrazi, Nouman Javed, Roohallah Alizadehsani, Prasad N.
Paradkar, U. Rajendra Acharya, Asim Bhatti
ID: 2312.08654
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.08654

Abstract:
Mosquito-borne diseases present considerable risks to the health of both animals
and humans. Aedes aegypti mosquitoes are the primary vectors for numerous
medically important viruses such as dengue, Zika, yellow fever, and chikungunya.
To characterize this mosquito neural activity, it is essential to classify the
generated electrical spikes. However, no open-source neural spike classification
method is currently available for mosquitoes. Our work presented in this paper
provides an innovative artificial intelligence-based method to classify the
neural spikes in uninfected, dengue-infected, and Zika-infected mosquitoes.
Aiming for outstanding performance, the method employs a fusion of
normalization, feature importance, and dimension reduction for the preprocessing
and combines convolutional neural network and extra gradient boosting (XGBoost)
for classification. The method uses the electrical spiking activity data of
mosquito neurons recorded by microelectrode array technology. We used data from
0, 1, 2, 3, and 7 days post-infection, containing over 15 million samples, to
analyze the method's performance. The performance of the proposed method was
evaluated using accuracy, precision, recall, and the F1 scores. The results
obtained from the method highlight its remarkable performance in differentiating
infected vs uninfected mosquito samples, achieving an average of 98.1%. The
performance was also compared with 6 other machine learning algorithms to
further assess the method's capability. The method outperformed all other
machine learning algorithms' performance. Overall, this research serves as an
efficient method to classify the neural spikes of Aedes aegypti mosquitoes and
can assist in unraveling the complex interactions between pathogens and
mosquitoes.
