Title: AI-based Wildfire Prevention, Detection and Suppression System
Authors: Prisha Shroff
ID: 2312.06990
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.06990

Abstract:
Wildfires pose a serious threat to the environment of the world. The global
wildfire season length has increased by 19% and severe wildfires have besieged
nations around the world. Every year, forests are burned by wildfires, causing
vast amounts of carbon dioxide to be released into the atmosphere, contributing
to climate change. There is a need for a system which prevents, detects, and
suppresses wildfires. The AI based Wildfire Prevention, Detection and
Suppression System (WPDSS) is a novel, fully automated, end to end, AI based
solution to effectively predict hotspots and detect wildfires, deploy drones to
spray fire retardant, preventing and suppressing wildfires. WPDSS consists of
four steps. 1. Preprocessing: WPDSS loads real time satellite data from NASA and
meteorological data from NOAA of vegetation, temperature, precipitation, wind,
soil moisture, and land cover for prevention. For detection, it loads the real
time data of Land Cover, Humidity, Temperature, Vegetation, Burned Area Index,
Ozone, and CO2. It uses the process of masking to eliminate not hotspots and not
wildfires such as water bodies, and rainfall. 2. Learning: The AI model consists
of a random forest classifier, which is trained using a labeled dataset of
hotspots and wildfires and not hotspots and not wildfires. 3. Identification of
hotspots and wildfires: WPDSS runs the real time data through the model to
automatically identify hotspots and wildfires. 4. Drone deployment: The drone
flies to the identified hotspot or wildfire location. WPDSS attained a 98.6%
accuracy in identifying hotspots and a 98.7% accuracy in detecting wildfires.
WPDSS will reduce the impacts of climate change, protect ecosystems and
biodiversity, avert huge economic losses, and save human lives. The power of
WPDSS developed can be applied to any location globally to prevent and suppress
wildfires, reducing climate change.
