Title: Generative agents in the streets: Exploring the use of Large Language
Models (LLMs) in collecting urban perceptions
Authors: Deepank Verma, Olaf Mumm, Vanessa Miriam Carlow
ID: 2312.13126
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.13126

Abstract:
Evaluating the surroundings to gain understanding, frame perspectives, and
anticipate behavioral reactions is an inherent human trait. However, these
continuous encounters are diverse and complex, posing challenges to their study
and experimentation. Researchers have been able to isolate environmental
features and study their effect on human perception and behavior. However, the
research attempts to replicate and study human behaviors with proxies, such as
by integrating virtual mediums and interviews, have been inconsistent. Large
language models (LLMs) have recently been unveiled as capable of contextual
understanding and semantic reasoning. These models have been trained on large
amounts of text and have evolved to mimic believable human behavior. This study
explores the current advancements in Generative agents powered by LLMs with the
help of perceptual experiments. The experiment employs Generative agents to
interact with the urban environments using street view images to plan their
journey toward specific goals. The agents are given virtual personalities, which
make them distinguishable. They are also provided a memory database to store
their thoughts and essential visual information and retrieve it when needed to
plan their movement. Since LLMs do not possess embodiment, nor have access to
the visual realm, and lack a sense of motion or direction, we designed movement
and visual modules that help agents gain an overall understanding of
surroundings. The agents are further employed to rate the surroundings they
encounter based on their perceived sense of safety and liveliness. As these
agents store details in their memory, we query the findings to get details
regarding their thought processes. Overall, this study experiments with current
AI developments and their potential in simulated human behavior in urban
environments.
