Title: What Explains Teachers' Trust of AI in Education across Six Countries?
Authors: Olga Viberg, Mutlu Cukurova, Yael Feldman-Maggor, Giora Alexandron,
Shizuka Shirai, Susumu Kanemune, Barbara Wasson, Cathrine Tømte, Daniel Spikol,
Marcelo Milrad, Raquel Coelho, René F. Kizilcec
ID: 2312.01627
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.01627

Abstract:
With growing expectations to use AI-based educational technology (AI-EdTech) to
improve students' learning outcomes and enrich teaching practice, teachers play
a central role in the adoption of AI-EdTech in classrooms. Teachers' willingness
to accept vulnerability by integrating technology into their everyday teaching
practice, that is, their trust in AI-EdTech, will depend on how much they expect
it to benefit them versus how many concerns it raises for them. In this study,
we surveyed 508 K-12 teachers across six countries on four continents to
understand which teacher characteristics shape teachers' trust in AI-EdTech, and
its proposed antecedents, perceived benefits and concerns about AI-EdTech. We
examined a comprehensive set of characteristics including demographic and
professional characteristics (age, gender, subject, years of experience, etc.),
cultural values (Hofstede's cultural dimensions), geographic locations (Brazil,
Israel, Japan, Norway, Sweden, USA), and psychological factors (self-efficacy
and understanding). Using multiple regression analysis, we found that teachers
with higher AI-EdTech self-efficacy and AI understanding perceive more benefits,
fewer concerns, and report more trust in AI-EdTech. We also found geographic and
cultural differences in teachers' trust in AI-EdTech, but no demographic
differences emerged based on their age, gender, or level of education. The
findings provide a comprehensive, international account of factors associated
with teachers' trust in AI-EdTech. Efforts to raise teachers' understanding of,
and trust in AI-EdTech, while considering their cultural values are encouraged
to support its adoption in K-12 education.
