Title: Forecasting Lithium-Ion Battery Longevity with Limited Data Availability:
Benchmarking Different Machine Learning Algorithms
Authors: Hudson Hilal, Pramit Saha
ID: 2312.05717
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.05717

Abstract:
As the use of Lithium-ion batteries continues to grow, it becomes increasingly
important to be able to predict their remaining useful life. This work aims to
compare the relative performance of different machine learning algorithms, both
traditional machine learning and deep learning, in order to determine the best-
performing algorithms for battery cycle life prediction based on minimal data.
We investigated 14 different machine learning models that were fed handcrafted
features based on statistical data and split into 3 feature groups for testing.
For deep learning models, we tested a variety of neural network models including
different configurations of standard Recurrent Neural Networks, Gated Recurrent
Units, and Long Short Term Memory with and without attention mechanism. Deep
learning models were fed multivariate time series signals based on the raw data
for each battery across the first 100 cycles. Our experiments revealed that the
machine learning algorithms on handcrafted features performed particularly well,
resulting in 10-20% average mean absolute percentage error. The best-performing
algorithm was the Random Forest Regressor, which gave a minimum 9.8% mean
absolute percentage error. Traditional machine learning models excelled due to
their capability to comprehend general data set trends. In comparison, deep
learning models were observed to perform particularly poorly on raw, limited
data. Algorithms like GRU and RNNs that focused on capturing medium-range data
dependencies were less adept at recognizing the gradual, slow trends critical
for this task. Our investigation reveals that implementing machine learning
models with hand-crafted features proves to be more effective than advanced deep
learning models for predicting the remaining useful Lithium-ion battery life
with limited data availability.
