Title: Inferring the relationship between soil temperature and the normalized
difference vegetation index with machine learning
Authors: Steven Mortier, Amir Hamedpour, Bart Bussmann, Ruth Phoebe Tchana
Wandji, Steven Latré, Bjarni D. Sigurdsson, Tom De Schepper, Tim Verdonck
ID: 2312.12258
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.12258

Abstract:
Changes in climate can greatly affect the phenology of plants, which can have
important feedback effects, such as altering the carbon cycle. These
phenological feedback effects are often induced by a shift in the start or end
dates of the growing season of plants. The normalized difference vegetation
index (NDVI) serves as a straightforward indicator for assessing the presence of
green vegetation and can also provide an estimation of the plants' growing
season. In this study, we investigated the effect of soil temperature on the
timing of the start of the season (SOS), timing of the peak of the season (POS),
and the maximum annual NDVI value (PEAK) in subarctic grassland ecosystems
between 2014 and 2019. We also explored the impact of other meteorological
variables, including air temperature, precipitation, and irradiance, on the
inter-annual variation in vegetation phenology. Using machine learning (ML)
techniques and SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) values, we analyzed the
relative importance and contribution of each variable to the phenological
predictions. Our results reveal a significant relationship between soil
temperature and SOS and POS, indicating that higher soil temperatures lead to an
earlier start and peak of the growing season. However, the Peak NDVI values
showed just a slight increase with higher soil temperatures. The analysis of
other meteorological variables demonstrated their impacts on the inter-annual
variation of the vegetation phenology. Ultimately, this study contributes to our
knowledge of the relationships between soil temperature, meteorological
variables, and vegetation phenology, providing valuable insights for predicting
vegetation phenology characteristics and managing subarctic grasslands in the
face of climate change. Additionally, this work provides a solid foundation for
future ML-based vegetation phenology studies.
