Title: Foundation Models in Robotics: Applications, Challenges, and the Future
Authors: Roya Firoozi, Johnathan Tucker, Stephen Tian, Anirudha Majumdar,
Jiankai Sun, Weiyu Liu, Yuke Zhu, Shuran Song, Ashish Kapoor, Karol Hausman,
Brian Ichter, Danny Driess, Jiajun Wu, Cewu Lu, Mac Schwager
ID: 2312.07843
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.07843

Abstract:
We survey applications of pretrained foundation models in robotics. Traditional
deep learning models in robotics are trained on small datasets tailored for
specific tasks, which limits their adaptability across diverse applications. In
contrast, foundation models pretrained on internet-scale data appear to have
superior generalization capabilities, and in some instances display an emergent
ability to find zero-shot solutions to problems that are not present in the
training data. Foundation models may hold the potential to enhance various
components of the robot autonomy stack, from perception to decision-making and
control. For example, large language models can generate code or provide common
sense reasoning, while vision-language models enable open-vocabulary visual
recognition. However, significant open research challenges remain, particularly
around the scarcity of robot-relevant training data, safety guarantees and
uncertainty quantification, and real-time execution. In this survey, we study
recent papers that have used or built foundation models to solve robotics
problems. We explore how foundation models contribute to improving robot
capabilities in the domains of perception, decision-making, and control. We
discuss the challenges hindering the adoption of foundation models in robot
autonomy and provide opportunities and potential pathways for future
advancements. The GitHub project corresponding to this paper (Preliminary
release. We are committed to further enhancing and updating this work to ensure
its quality and relevance) can be found here: https://github.com/robotics-
survey/Awesome-Robotics-Foundation-Models
