Title: A Review of Communicating Robot Learning during Human-Robot Interaction
Authors: Soheil Habibian, Antonio Alvarez Valdivia, Laura H. Blumenschein, Dylan
P. Losey
ID: 2312.00948
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.00948

Abstract:
For robots to seamlessly interact with humans, we first need to make sure that
humans and robots understand one another. Diverse algorithms have been developed
to enable robots to learn from humans (i.e., transferring information from
humans to robots). In parallel, visual, haptic, and auditory communication
interfaces have been designed to convey the robot's internal state to the human
(i.e., transferring information from robots to humans). Prior research often
separates these two directions of information transfer, and focuses primarily on
either learning algorithms or communication interfaces. By contrast, in this
review we take an interdisciplinary approach to identify common themes and
emerging trends that close the loop between learning and communication.
Specifically, we survey state-of-the-art methods and outcomes for communicating
a robot's learning back to the human teacher during human-robot interaction.
This discussion connects human-in-the-loop learning methods and explainable
robot learning with multi-modal feedback systems and measures of human-robot
interaction. We find that -- when learning and communication are developed
together -- the resulting closed-loop system can lead to improved human
teaching, increased human trust, and human-robot co-adaptation. The paper
includes a perspective on several of the interdisciplinary research themes and
open questions that could advance how future robots communicate their learning
to everyday operators. Finally, we implement a selection of the reviewed methods
in a case study where participants kinesthetically teach a robot arm. This case
study documents and tests an integrated approach for learning in ways that can
be communicated, conveying this learning across multi-modal interfaces, and
measuring the resulting changes in human and robot behavior. See videos of our
case study here: https://youtu.be/EXfQctqFzWs
