Title: Measuring entanglement entropy and its topological signature for phononic
systems
Authors: Zhi-Kang Lin, Yao Zhou, Bin Jiang, Bing-Quan Wu, Li-Mei Chen, Xiao-Yu
Liu, Li-Wei Wang, Peng Ye, Jian-Hua Jiang
ID: 2312.08632
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.08632

Abstract:
Entanglement entropy is a fundamental concept with rising importance in
different fields ranging from quantum information science, black holes to
materials science. In complex materials and systems, entanglement entropy
provides insight into the collective degrees of freedom that underlie the
systems' complex behaviours. As well-known predictions, the entanglement entropy
exhibits area laws for systems with gapped excitations, whereas it follows the
Gioev-Klich-Widom scaling law in gapless fermion systems. Furthermore, the
entanglement spectrum provides salient characterizations of topological phases
and phase transitions beyond the conventional paradigms. However, many of these
fundamental predictions have not yet been confirmed in experiments due to the
difficulties in measuring entanglement entropy in physical systems. Here, we
report the experimental verification of the above predictions by probing the
nonlocal correlations in phononic systems. From the pump-probe responses in
phononic crystals, we obtain the entanglement entropy and entanglement spectrum
for phononic systems with the fermion filling analog. With these measurements,
we verify the Gioev-Klich-Widom scaling law of entanglement entropy for various
quasiparticle dispersions in one- and two-dimensions. Moreover, we observe the
salient signatures of topological phases in the entanglement spectrum and
entanglement entropy which unveil an unprecedented probe of topological phases
without relying on the bulk-boundary correspondence. The progress here opens a
frontier where entanglement entropy serves as an important experimental tool in
the study of emergent phases and phase transitions which can be generalized to
non-Hermitian and other unconventional regimes.
