Title: Radio Signal Classification by Adversarially Robust Quantum Machine
Learning
Authors: Yanqiu Wu, Eromanga Adermann, Chandra Thapa, Seyit Camtepe, Hajime
Suzuki, Muhammad Usman
ID: 2312.07821
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.07821

Abstract:
Radio signal classification plays a pivotal role in identifying the modulation
scheme used in received radio signals, which is essential for demodulation and
proper interpretation of the transmitted information. Researchers have
underscored the high susceptibility of ML algorithms for radio signal
classification to adversarial attacks. Such vulnerability could result in severe
consequences, including misinterpretation of critical messages, interception of
classified information, or disruption of communication channels. Recent
advancements in quantum computing have revolutionized theories and
implementations of computation, bringing the unprecedented development of
Quantum Machine Learning (QML). It is shown that quantum variational classifiers
(QVCs) provide notably enhanced robustness against classical adversarial attacks
in image classification. However, no research has yet explored whether QML can
similarly mitigate adversarial threats in the context of radio signal
classification. This work applies QVCs to radio signal classification and
studies their robustness to various adversarial attacks. We also propose the
novel application of the approximate amplitude encoding (AAE) technique to
encode radio signal data efficiently. Our extensive simulation results present
that attacks generated on QVCs transfer well to CNN models, indicating that
these adversarial examples can fool neural networks that they are not explicitly
designed to attack. However, the converse is not true. QVCs primarily resist the
attacks generated on CNNs. Overall, with comprehensive simulations, our results
shed new light on the growing field of QML by bridging knowledge gaps in QAML in
radio signal classification and uncovering the advantages of applying QML
methods in practical applications.
