Title: Do LLM Agents Exhibit Social Behavior?
Authors: Yan Leng, Yuan Yuan
ID: 2312.15198
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.15198

Abstract:
As LLMs increasingly take on roles in human-AI interactions and autonomous AI
systems, understanding their social behavior becomes important for informed use
and continuous improvement. However, their behaviors in social interactions with
humans and other agents, as well as the mechanisms shaping their responses,
remain underexplored. To address this gap, we introduce a novel probabilistic
framework, State-Understanding-Value-Action (SUVA), to systematically analyze
LLM responses in social contexts based on their textual outputs (i.e.,
utterances). Using canonical behavioral economics games and social preference
concepts relatable to LLM users, SUVA assesses LLMs' social behavior through
both their final decisions and the response generation processes leading to
those decisions. Our analysis of eight LLMs -- including two GPT, four LLaMA,
and two Mistral models -- suggests that most models do not generate decisions
aligned solely with self-interest; instead, they often produce responses that
reflect social welfare considerations and display patterns consistent with
direct and indirect reciprocity. Additionally, higher-capacity models more
frequently display group identity effects. The SUVA framework also provides
explainable tools -- including tree-based visualizations and probabilistic
dependency analysis -- to elucidate how factors in LLMs' utterance-based
reasoning influence their decisions. We demonstrate that utterance-based
reasoning reliably predicts LLMs' final actions; references to altruism,
fairness, and cooperation in the reasoning increase the likelihood of prosocial
actions, while mentions of self-interest and competition reduce them. Overall,
our framework enables practitioners to assess LLMs for applications involving
social interactions, and provides researchers with a structured method to
interpret how LLM behavior arises from utterance-based reasoning.
