Title: Machine Learning Based Compton Suppression for Nuclear Fusion Plasma
Diagnostics
Authors: Kimberley Lennon, Chantal Shand, Robin Smith
ID: 2312.13685
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.13685

Abstract:
Diagnostics are critical on the path to commercial fusion reactors, since
measurements and characterisation of the plasma is important for sustaining
fusion reactions. Gamma spectroscopy is commonly used to provide information
about the neutron energy spectrum from activation analysis, which can be used to
calculate the neutron flux and fusion power. The detection limits for measuring
nuclear dosimetry reactions used in such diagnostics are fundamentally related
to Compton scattering events making up a background continuum in measured
spectra. This background lies in the same energy region as peaks from low-energy
gamma rays, leading to detection and characterisation limitations. This paper
presents a digital machine learning Compton suppression algorithm (MLCSA), that
uses state-of-the-art machine learning techniques to perform pulse shape
discrimination (PSD) for high purity germanium (HPGe) detectors. The MLCSA
identifies key features of individual pulses to differentiate between those that
are generated from photopeaks and Compton scatter events. Compton events are
then rejected, reducing the low energy background. This novel suppression
algorithm improves gamma spectroscopy results by lowering minimum detectable
activity (MDA) limits and thus reducing the measurement time required to reach
the desired detection limit. In this paper, the performance of the MLCSA is
demonstrated using an HPGe detector, with a gamma spectrum containing
americium-241 (Am-241) and cobalt-60 (Co-60). The MDA of Am-241 improved by 51%
and the signal to noise ratio (SNR) improved by 49%, while the Co-60 peaks were
partially preserved (reduced by 78%). The MLCSA requires no modelling of the
specific detector and so has the potential to be detector agnostic, meaning the
technique could be applied to a variety of detector types and applications.
