Title: Capturing Dynamics in Online Public Discourse: A Case Study of Universal
Basic Income Discussions on Reddit
Authors: Rachel Kim, Veniamin Veselovsky, Ashton Anderson
ID: 2312.09611
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.09611

Abstract:
Societal change is often driven by shifts in public opinion. As citizens evolve
in their norms, beliefs, and values, public policies change too. While
traditional opinion polling and surveys can outline the broad strokes of whether
public opinion on a particular topic is changing, they usually cannot capture
the full multi-dimensional richness and diversity of opinion present in a large
heterogeneous population. However, an increasing fraction of public discourse
about public policy issues is now occurring on online platforms, which presents
an opportunity to measure public opinion change at a qualitatively different
scale of resolution and context.
  In this paper, we present a conceptual model of observed opinion change on
online platforms and apply it to study public discourse on Universal Basic
Income (UBI) on Reddit throughout its history. UBI is a periodic, no-strings-
attached cash payment given to every citizen of a population. We study UBI as it
is a clearly-defined policy proposal that has recently experienced a surge of
interest through trends like automation and events like the COVID-19 pandemic.
We find that overall stance towards UBI on Reddit significantly declined until
mid-2019, when this historical trend suddenly reversed and Reddit became
substantially more supportive. Using our model, we find the most significant
drivers of this overall stance change were shifts within different user cohorts,
within communities that represented similar affluence levels, and within
communities that represented similar partisan leanings. Our method identifies
nuanced social drivers of opinion change in the large-scale public discourse
that now regularly occurs online, and could be applied to a broad set of other
important issues and policies.
