Title: The impact of generative artificial intelligence on socioeconomic
inequalities and policy making
Authors: Valerio Capraro, Austin Lentsch, Daron Acemoglu, Selin Akgun, Aisel
Akhmedova, Ennio Bilancini, Jean-François Bonnefon, Pablo Brañas-Garza, Luigi
Butera, Karen M. Douglas, Jim A. C. Everett, Gerd Gigerenzer, Christine
Greenhow, Daniel A. Hashimoto, Julianne Holt-Lunstad, Jolanda Jetten, Simon
Johnson, Chiara Longoni, Pete Lunn, Simone Natale, Iyad Rahwan, Neil Selwyn,
Vivek Singh, Siddharth Suri, Jennifer Sutcliffe, Joe Tomlinson, Sander van der
Linden, Paul A. M. Van Lange, Friederike Wall, Jay J. Van Bavel, Riccardo Viale
ID: 2401.05377
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.05377

Abstract:
Generative artificial intelligence has the potential to both exacerbate and
ameliorate existing socioeconomic inequalities. In this article, we provide a
state-of-the-art interdisciplinary overview of the potential impacts of
generative AI on (mis)information and three information-intensive domains: work,
education, and healthcare. Our goal is to highlight how generative AI could
worsen existing inequalities while illuminating how AI may help mitigate
pervasive social problems. In the information domain, generative AI can
democratize content creation and access, but may dramatically expand the
production and proliferation of misinformation. In the workplace, it can boost
productivity and create new jobs, but the benefits will likely be distributed
unevenly. In education, it offers personalized learning, but may widen the
digital divide. In healthcare, it might improve diagnostics and accessibility,
but could deepen pre-existing inequalities. In each section we cover a specific
topic, evaluate existing research, identify critical gaps, and recommend
research directions, including explicit trade-offs that complicate the
derivation of a priori hypotheses. We conclude with a section highlighting the
role of policymaking to maximize generative AI's potential to reduce
inequalities while mitigating its harmful effects. We discuss strengths and
weaknesses of existing policy frameworks in the European Union, the United
States, and the United Kingdom, observing that each fails to fully confront the
socioeconomic challenges we have identified. We propose several concrete
policies that could promote shared prosperity through the advancement of
generative AI. This article emphasizes the need for interdisciplinary
collaborations to understand and address the complex challenges of generative
AI.
