Title: Emissions Reporting Maturity Model: supporting cities to leverage
emissions-related processes through performance indicators and artificial
intelligence
Authors: Victor de A. Xavier, Felipe M. G. França, Priscila M. V. Lima
ID: 2401.00857
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.00857

Abstract:
Climate change and global warming have been trending topics worldwide since the
Eco-92 conference. However, little progress has been made in reducing greenhouse
gases (GHGs). The problems and challenges related to emissions are complex and
require a concerted and comprehensive effort to address them. Emissions
reporting is a critical component of GHG reduction policy and is therefore the
focus of this work. The main goal of this work is two-fold: (i) to propose an
emission reporting evaluation model to leverage emissions reporting overall
quality and (ii) to use artificial intelligence (AI) to support the initiatives
that improve emissions reporting. Thus, this work presents an Emissions
Reporting Maturity Model (ERMM) for examining, clustering, and analysing data
from emissions reporting initiatives to help the cities to deal with climate
change and global warming challenges. The Performance Indicator Development
Process (PIDP) proposed in this work provides ways to leverage the quality of
the available data necessary for the execution of the evaluations identified by
the ERMM. Hence, the PIDP supports the preparation of the data from emissions-
related databases, the classification of the data according to similarities
highlighted by different clustering techniques, and the identification of
performance indicator candidates, which are strengthened by a qualitative
analysis of selected data samples. Thus, the main goal of ERRM is to evaluate
and classify the cities regarding the emission reporting processes, pointing out
the drawbacks and challenges faced by other cities from different contexts, and
at the end to help them to leverage the underlying emissions-related processes
and emissions mitigation initiatives.
