Title: Health First: An evidence-based alcohol strategy for the UK
Authors: Will Anderson, Sir Ian Gilmore, Linda Bauld, Mark A Bellis, Katherine Brown
ID: openalex.W276233334
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/1893/21715

Alcohol is taken for granted in the UK today. It is easy to get hold of,
increasingly affordable, advertised everywhere and accepted by many as an
integral part of daily life. Yet, despite this, the great majority of the
population recognise the harm that alcohol causes. They believe that drinking
damages health, drives anti social behaviour, harms children and families and
creates huge costs for the NHS and the Police. They are right. Every year in the
UK, there are thousands of deaths and over a million hospital admissions related
to drinking. More than two in five (44%) violent crimes are committed under the
influence of alcohol, as are 37% of domesti c violence incidents. One fifth of
all violent crime occurs in or near pubs and clubs and 45% of adults avoid town
centres at night because of drunken behaviour. The personal, social and economic
cost of alcohol has been estimated to be up to &amp;pound;55bn for England and
&amp;pound;7.5bn for Scotland. None of this should be taken for granted. The
impact of drinking on public health and community safety is so great that
radical steps are needed to change our relationship with alcohol. We need to
imagine a society where low or no alcohol consumpti on is the norm, drunkenness
is socially unacceptable and town centres are safe and welcoming places for
everyone to use. Our vision is for a safer, healthier and happier world where
the harm caused by alcohol is minimised. This vision is achievable. But only if
we tackle the primary drivers of alcohol consumption. The evidence is clear: the
most effective way to reduce the harm from alcohol is to reduce the
affordability, availability and attractiveness of alcohol products. It is not
enough to limit the damage once people are drunk, dependent, ill or dying. We
need to intervene earlier in order to reduce consumption across the entire
population. The tools are available. The &amp;lsquo;four Ps' of the marketing
mix - price, product, promotion and place - are used by alcohol producers and
retailers to increase their sales of alcohol. They can also be used by
government to reduce alcohol sales, alcohol consumption and alcohol-related
harm. Alcohol taxes are an effective public health measure as they raise prices
and suppress demand. However, if they do not keep pace with both inflation and
incomes, alcohol products will become more affordable over time. This has been
the case in the UK. Deep discounting by retailers has also driven down the price
of alcohol and encouraged heavy drinkers to maintain dangerous levels of
consumption. These problems need to be tackled by a combinati on of more
effective fiscal policy and controls on pricing and discounting. Alcohol
products are an extraordinary anomaly. Unlike most food products, they are both
remarkably harmful and excepti onally lightly regulated. As with other toxic
products, the product label ought to communicate the content of the product and
the risks of its consumpti on. Regulation should drive out products that appeal
to young people while also incentivising the development and sale of lower
strength products. The pervasive marketing of alcohol products in the UK is
indefensible. Current restrictions are woefully inadequate: children and young
people are regularly exposed to alcohol adverti sing in both old and new media.
Only a complete ban on all alcohol advertising and sponsorship will make a
lasting diff erence. Licensing practice in the UK is out of date. The focus on
pubs and bars has allowed shops and supermarkets to become the dominant players
in alcohol sales. Consequently, alcohol is now more available than it has ever
been. This has driven pre-loading: getting drunk on cheap, shop-bought alcohol
before heading out to late-opening night life. Licensing must focus on public
health and seek to control the overall availability of alcohol as well as the
effects of drunkenness. Beyond these populati on-level approaches, many more
targeted measures are needed to reduce alcohol-related harm. Early interventi on
by health and social care professionals is an important and underexploited
opportunity to prevent problems developing. Stronger drink driving measures are
also required. All these measures are needed. Together, they provide a template
for an integrated and comprehensive strategy to tackle the harm from alcohol in
the UK.
