Title: The Politics of Identity: Emerging Indigeneity
Authors: Michelle A. Harris, Martin Nakata, Bronwyn Carlson
ID: openalex.W1496450420
URL: https://doi.org/10.5130/978-0-9872369-2-0

The issue of Indigenous identity has gained more attention in recent years from
social science scholars, yet much of the discussions still centre on the
politics of belonging or not belonging. While these recent discussions in part
speak to the complicated and contested nature of Indigeneity, both those who
claim Indigenous identity and those who write about it seem to fall into a
paradox of acknowledging its complexity on the one hand, while on the other hand
reifying notions of ‘tradition’ and ‘authentic cultural expression’ as core
features of an Indigenous identity. Since identity theorists generally agree
that who we understand ourselves to be is as much a function of the time and
place in which we live as it is about who we and others say we are, this
scholarship does not progress our knowledge on the contemporary characteristics
of Indigenous identity formations. The range of international scholars in this
volume have begun an approach to the contemporary identity issues from very
different perspectives, although collectively they all push the boundaries of
the scholarship that relate to identities of Indigenous people in various
contexts from around the world. Their essays provide at times provocative
insights as the authors write about their own experiences and as they seek to
answer the hard questions: Are emergent identities newly constructed identities
that emerge as a function of historical moments, places, and social forces? If
so, what is it that helps to forge these identities and what helps them to
retain markers of Indigeneity? And what are some of the challenges (both from
outside and within groups) that Indigenous individuals face as they negotiate
the line between ‘authentic’ cultural expression and emergent identities? Is
there anything to be learned from the ways in which these identities are
performed throughout the world among Indigenous groups? Indeed why do we assume
claims to multiple racial or ethnic identities limits one’s Indigenous identity?
The question at the heart of our enquiry about the emerging Indigenous
identities is when is it the right time to say me, us, we… them?
