Title: Abstracts of the 17th European Conference on Eye Movements 2013
Authors: Kenneth Holmqvist, Fiona Mulvey, Roger Johannson
ID: openalex.W2611058793
URL: https://doi.org/10.16910/jemr.6.3.1

This document contains all abstracts of the 17th European Conference on Eye
Movements, August 11-16 2013 in Lund, Sweden ECEM 2013 has been the 17th
European Conference on Eye Movements, with the original aims ‘to exchange
information on current research, equipment and software’ remaining at the
forefront. ECEM is transdisciplinary, promoting new approaches, co-operation
between research fields and communication between researchers. It has grown from
it’s origins as a small, specialist conference to a large international event,
covering all aspects of basic and applied research using eye movements ( see
information from previous conferences in the archive). Today, ECEM is the
largest conference on eye movements in the world, based on number of
submissions. In keeping with the tradition of supporting young researchers and
promoting new research. In the days prior to the conference, ECEM 2013 has
included methods courses for all interested delegates on several aspects of eye
movements research and applications, led by top international experts (see
method workshops). Panel discussions during the conference have provided a forum
for communication between researchers, manufacturers and interface designers on
new and emerging themes in eye movements research and technology.(see program).
The exhibition included top eye tracker manufacturers (see exhibition). ECEM
2013 bought together neurophysiologists, psychologists, neuropsychologists,
clinicians, linguists, computational and applied scientists, engineers and
manufacturers interested in the movements of the eyes, with an emphasis on
learning from each other and promoting development of the field. This ECEM was
hosted by the Eye Tracking Group at Lund University, Sweden, and organised by
the Eye Movement Researcher's Association (EMRA) and the COGAIN (communication
through gaze interaction) association, to promote interdisciplinary, basic and
applied research excellence.
