Title: "Vi får ju inte riktigt förutsättningarna för att genomföra det som vi vill" : en studie om lärare möjligheter och hinder till förändring och förbättring i praktiken
Authors: Lena Tyrén
ID: openalex.W1544168736
URL: http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:hb:diva-3655

Initially the overall aim of this thesis was to describe and analyse what was
happening in the educational activities when teachers at a school that I have
called Tower School introduced the computer as a tool for helping pupils who
were learning to write and read. Key questions concerned the issue of
improvement. Did introducing the computer as a tool in the teaching and learning
process help the pupils with their learning or not and, if so, in what ways. The
research approach chosen was an action research approach. Action research is
concerned with professional practice and improvement. It is contextual and
oriented toward action processes and change.\nThe initial phase of the research
went more or less according to plan. I followed the development process of the
introduction and use of the computer as a learning tool, met regularly with the
teachers and together with them developed a good working relationship. After
about a year things changed. With the restructuring that was taking place in the
region changes began to take place also at Tower School and this had effects on
the research. In addition to the\ninitial aim to research changes related to
student learning a second purpose developed. This purpose was to describe and
analyse how political governance and underlying societal forces might influence
what happens in school\ndevelopment.\nThere were two reasons for this new extra
dimension. One was a methodological interest in relation to planning action
research projects at times of political change in the education sector. The
other was an educational theoretical interest connected to the school as a
policy-driven organization. My interest here was for changes in the political
economy at the macro level and how the network of macro-political and economic
relations affected the micropolitical level of the school, its classrooms,
participating teachers in these\nclassrooms, their students and me as a
researcher?
