Title: A New Islamic Rating Index of Well-Being for Muslim Countries
Authors: Daud Abdul-Fattah Batchelor
ID: openalex.W4255345951
URL: https://doi.org/10.52282/icr.v4i2.473

The differing views that various parties and states hold regarding the efficacy
of their Islamisation approach and its impact nationally remain unresolved until
today. This paper is an attempt to assess the well-being of countries in an
objective and scientific manner. It introduces a new Islamic Index of Well-being
(IIW) for Muslim Majority Countries (MMCs), which is based on principles derived
from the Qur’an and Sunnah to comprise the key fields of Personal Religiosity
and Social Interactions. These two elements are given equal weighting. The
Religiosity element is obtained from published data of the Pew Research Center
for indicators of the percentage of Muslim citizens who perform obligatory
practices of praying five times daily, men attending the mosque at least once
weekly, and Muslims fasting in Ramadan (or paying zakah). Research has shown a
direct, positive relationship between Religiosity levels and psychological well-
being. Five parameters are assessed for the Social Interactions performance of
MMCs: secondary education, good status of women, care of children, limited
income inequality and elimination of corruption. From an Islamic perspective,
governments are required to assist weaker members of society, which is reflected
in indicators used to determine the status of women, children and the poor. The
resultant IIWs calculated for the 27 (Arab Gulf countries were not surveyed) out
of a total 50 MMCs plus Nigeria show that the highest IIW levels are in
Southeast Asia (Malaysia and Indonesia take the top positions), followed by
Senegal and the Palestinian Territories. Middle Eastern countries follow, then
sub-Saharan African countries with overlap, while former Communist bloc
countries generally have the lowest indices. 2012 IIWs represent a base level
for the measurement of country improvements in years to come.&#x0D;
