Title: Whose Hero? Reinventing Epic in French West African Literature
Authors: Jonathon Repinecz
ID: openalex.W2202778938
URL: https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6vz9618c

This dissertation explores the relationship between oral and written literature
through the lens of epic. Springing from an engagement with scholarship that has
defined and defended the notion of an African epic, it seeks to reevaluate the
relevance of this category in the case of West African literature in French.
While some critics have argued that the concept of epic is too Eurocentric to be
relevant to African narrative traditions, most believe that to renounce the idea
of an "African epic" is to stifle comparative literature, and possibly even to
reproduce the trope of a Dark Continent too primitive to produce anything great.
At the same time, scholars of francophone literature regularly rely on the
notion of an "epic" dimension in some contemporary texts. However, such studies
too frequently conform to Mikhail Bakhtin's vision of this dimension as a
grandiose but flat world of ancient heroes, utterly removed from the evolving
concerns of the present--which belong to the realm of the novel. This study both
draws on and challenges scholarship within these conversations in order to
propose a more innovative reading of West African oral traditional narratives
that we call epic, as well as their place in francophone writing. The inherently
oral and performance-specific element of West African heroic narrative is a
crucial motivating factor for its contemporary reincarnations in French-language
literature. Rather than "flattening" the genre of epic, as Bakhtin and other
critics have done, by framing it in terms of European points of reference,
conservative group identities, or a navitist return to authenticity, African
literature in French channels the critical reflexivity of oral heroic narrative:
traditional material constantly reinvents itself in ways that are self-
reflexive, adaptable to "modern" concerns, and indeed capable of offering social
criticism in the present. For this reason, major African writers--specifically
Amadou Hampâté Bâ of Mali, Ahmadou Kourouma of Ivory Coast, and Boubacar
Boris Diop of Senegal--weave these traditions into their writing as a way of
reimagining the relevance of precolonial discourse genres in the postcolonial
world. A recurring goal of their novels is, for example, to challenge received
interpretations of oral heroic narrative and to draw new inspiration from them
regarding issues like contemporary politics, gender roles, and intergenerational
relations. They also open up important theoretical questions, such as what it
means to criticize the very category of "tradition" from within a "traditional"
space. This strategy of rewriting allows us to think the epic-novel paradigm as
depending not just on rupture, as much literary theory has emphasized, but also
on continuity.The first two chapters of this study explore the category of West
African epic from the point of view of colonial and postcolonial literary
history and anthropology, while the final two as well as the conclusion examine
how this category is mobilized in the literary work of the individual writers
mentioned above: Amadou Hampâté Bâ's L'Etrange destin de Wangrin (1973) and
posthumous memoirs Amkoullel, l'enfant peul (1991) and Oui mon commandant!
(1994) in Chapter Three; Ahmadou Kourouma's political-historical novelistic
trilogy, consisting of Les Soleils des Indépendances (1968), Monnè, outrages
et défis (1990), and En attendant le vote des bêtes sauvages (1998) in Chapter
Four; and Boubacar Boris Diop's Wolof-language novel Doomi Goolo (2003), adapted
into French as Les Petits de la Guenon (2009), in the conclusion. In general,
the discursive shift that is traced over time leads away from epic as "usable
past"--that is, as an interpretation of history that serves political ends--to a
critical consciousness of this usability. The authors in question specifically
try to reorient heroic narrative away from its generally understood function of
legitimating existing power structures and transmitting dominant ideology, using
it instead to articulate critiques and alternatives to these. They also draw
attention to the often dangerous mobilizations of epic discourse, which involve
notions of authenticity and heroism, made by political elites.
