Title: A brand new future? Cool Japan and the social imaginary of the branded nation
Authors: Katja Valaskivi
ID: openalex.W2071304188
URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/09555803.2012.756538

AbstractThe Cool Japan slogan has been in circulation for ten years, and has
been discussed from the points of view of popular culture and creative
industries, as well as nationalism and nation-building. Studies focus mainly on
Japan itself or the Japanese influence in Asia and elsewhere. This article adds
another perspective by focusing on the Cool Japan project in relation to the
transnationally circulating practice of nation branding.Keywords: Nation
branding, Cool Japan, social imaginary, Creating a New Japan, transnational,
circulation, Japan Brand AcknowledgementsThe writer wishes to thank Professor
Nick Couldry from Goldsmiths college, University of London, senior lecturer
Griseldis Kirsh at SOAS and colleagues at University of Tampere, Goldsmiths
College and Nissan Institute for Japanese Studies (University of Oxford), as
well as the anonymous reviewers of the article, for comments on earlier versions
of this paper. The research has been supported by the Academy of Finland, grant
number 133122. Thank you also to those who granted interviews for this
study.Notes1Japan has been the focus of the Western imagination and admiration
several times before. The Impressionists had a fascination with Japanese
culture, in the 1960s the beatniks displayed their admiration for Zen, and the
1980s were a time in which Japanese marketing studies fascinated the world (see
Napier Citation2007 for a detailed account of the changing relationship between
Japan and 'the West'). Tentatively, it appears that 'Japan' has been either
admired or feared and hated in 'the West' (cf. Valaskivi
Citation2010).Additional informationNotes on contributorsKatja ValaskiviKatja
Valaskivi, PhD, is Senior Research Fellow and Reader (Docent) at the University
of Tampere, School of Communication, Media and Theatre. Her research interests
include the social construction of knowledge and belief, media and popular
culture. She is currently working on the circulating, transnational practice of
nation branding and the concept of 'Cool'. She has worked as a visiting
researcher at Goldsmiths College, University of London, as well as Sophia
University, Tokyo and the National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo. In 2002–2005
she headed the Finnish Institute in Japan, Tokyo. Her recent publications in
English include 'Dimensions of innovationism', in Peter Nynäs et al. (ed.) Post-
secular society (Transaction Books, 2012) and ' "Everything is there": Internet
in the lives of Japanese popular culture fans in Finland', in Sonja Kangas (ed.)
Digital pioneers: tracing the cultural drivers of future media culture. Youth
reserch network publications 49, 2011. Available from
http://www.nuorisotutkimusseura.fi/julkaisuja/digitalpioneers.pdf. She may be
contacted at: katja.valaskivi@uta.fi
