Title: In the Clearing: Black Female Bodies, Space and Settler Colonial Landscapes
Authors: Tiffany Jeannette King
ID: openalex.W68516560
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/1903/14525

This dissertation is an interdisciplinary project that introduces vocabulary,
analytic units and cultural landscapes that make it possible to conceive of
slavery and settler colonialism as constitutive of one another. By focusing on
Black female gender formation at the intersection of slavery and settler
colonialism, this study argues that Black women's bodies function as sites where
we can observe the power of slavery and settler colonialism simultaneously. Both
the Slave Master's need for bodies and the Settler's need for space required the
production of the Black female slave body as a unit of unending property. As a
metonym for fungible property, the Black female slave body served as an apt
metaphor for space within settler colonial imaginaries. Though largely omitted
from the analytic frames of settler colonialism, Black women's bodies are
materially and symbolically essential to the space making practices of settler
colonialism in the U.S. and Canada. Throughout this project, Black women
function as tropes of spatial expansion, spatial limits and chaos. Black female
bodies are material bodies that can either facilitate settler colonial expansion
or impede the settler spatial order. As embodied and agentive subjects, Black
women contest the dehumanizing spatial processes of property accumulation by
establishing new relationships to space and spatial production. This
dissertation uses material and cultural landscapes in order to stage these
various contestations over space. The landscapes in this study include: the
hands of Black female slaves, "the settlement-plantation," the Eliza Lucas
Pinckney archive, the Moynihan Report, the "Black Matriarch," and the
coalitional politics of a "Black-Native Feminist Formation" in Toronto, Canada.
I analyze these landscapes by using methods from discourse and textual analysis
as well as autobiographical writing. I conduct textual analyses of the film
Daughters of the Dust, the film's sequel in the form of Julie Dash's novel
bearing the same title, the Eliza Lucas Pinckney archive and the Moynihan
Report. Finally, I recollect the work of Black and Native women who were apart
of INCITE Toronto from 2006-2008. This dissertation argues for more critical
attention to the ways that Blackness, specifically Black femaleness, matters to
settler colonial power.
