Title: School and the Cultural-Heritage Environment: Pedagogical, Creative and Artistic Aspects
Authors: Hicela Ivon, Dubravka Kuščević
ID: openalex.W1507289304
URL: https://doi.org/10.26529/cepsj.238

The present paper explores the idea that learning, both in and out of school, is
a cultural act, and that school and its cultural-heritage environment stamp
their own characteristics on pupils. This implies that pupils gradually, with
the help of teachers and other relevant adults from their close social
environment, develop and adjust their behaviour and lifestyle to their cultural
and civilisational milieu. An integrative approach to learning and teaching,
through the concept of “learning-centred teaching”, can be instrumental in this
regard (Terhart, 2001). This approach aims at linking cognitive, social and
moral teachings. According to this teaching concept, pupils learn to appreciate
the value of their cultural heritage environment by living and reliving its
experience, while freely and reflexively interpreting and becoming active
participants in the culture of those who “learn about life by living” (Terhart,
2001). The relationship between school and its cultural-heritage environment is
discussed from a creative and artistic perspective in the second part of the
paper. By visually stimulating artistic expression when learning about the
cultural-heritage and natural environment of school, and through the concept of
“action-centred learning”, we explain how pupils can be motivated to learn and
display creative-artistic expression, and how they can be actively involved in
their communities (participating in organising art exhibitions in their
neighbourhood, working in museum workshops, etc.). Pupils’ art projects,
inspired by the historical, cultural and natural heritage of their environment,
confirm that such projects are an effective way of encouraging pupils’ identity
development and sensitivity towards the arts. They teach pupils about the
importance of preserving cultural heritage, which is one of the basic principles
in the upbringing of future participants and creators of new cultural values.
Children’s artistic works illustrate examples of good school practice.
