Title: Re-Embodied : Young Women, the Body Quest and Agency in the Culture of Appearances
Authors: Satu Liimakka
ID: openalex.W1506650758
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10138/38047

The body relation of many contemporary Western young women involves experiences
and practices of body dissatisfaction, habitual body monitoring and appearance
management. This doctoral dissertation explores young Finnish women s body
experiences and possibilities for embodied agency within or despite the
constraints of their given socio-cultural surroundings. By drawing from Merleau-
Ponty s phenomenology of the body, Bourdieu s reflexive sociology and feminist
appropriations of these, both the stability of habitual body experience and the
possibilities of transforming it are explored. \n\nThe study focuses on the body
experiences of young Finnish women who study in upper secondary school or
university. The study is comprised of three sub-studies that explored the
accounts of upper secondary school students, students of social sciences and
students of women s studies. In order to explore the relationships between an
individual, social groups and society as manifesting in the individual s body
experience, the study analysed both collectively and individually produced
accounts of body experience, focus group discussions and individually written
accounts, and utilized in their analysis grounded theory-inspired coding and
interpretative phenomenological analysis. \n\nThe dissertation shows that the
common experiences of self-critical body surveillance and body anxiety among
contemporary young women rise from the experience of a representational self,
constructed by a culture of appearances. In this study, young women s body
experiences were constructed within contradictory demands posed by current
cultural beauty and health imperatives and the current cultural self imperative
requiring individual, resistant agency in not surrendering to the cultural body
imperatives. The young women typically utilized a strategy defined in this study
as Cartesian agency, emphasizing the young woman s independence from culture,
other people and her own body. Yet Cartesian agency mainly maintained a state of
bodily alienation. Through new corporeal experiences, in combination with
critical (feminist) reflexivity, some of the young women were able to inhabit
their bodies in new and more empowering ways. The agency of the body itself in
acquiring new ways of being, thus enabling the young women to re-embody
themselves, helped to cause a rupture in their previous socialization of
disembodied selves inhabiting objectified and problematic bodies.
