Title: Beyond Survival to Thrival: A Narrative Study of an Urban Teacher's Career Journey
Authors: Kristina M. Valtierra
ID: openalex.W2464675293
URL: https://digitalcommons.du.edu/etd/667

Abstract Teacher burn out contributes to the epidemic of early career exit. At
least half of all new K-12 teachers leave the profession by the time they reach
their fifth year of teaching. Conversely, there are urban teachers who survive
burn out and thrive as career- long educators. This qualitative study is an in-
depth look into one 40-year veteran teacher's career narrative, answering the
question: How did this teacher not only survive but also thrive as a career-long
urban teacher? Additionally, the following sub-questions are explored: a) How is
her spirit sustained throughout her teacher lifecycle? b) How can her story
contribute to the literature as a counter-narrative to the current rhetoric
focused on "teacher bashing"? A critical socio-political lens guides this study.
The socio-political forces that lead to urban teacher burn out are explained.
The idea of teacher burn in, in which educators experience the symptoms of burn
out, but choose to remain in the profession and exist as toxic influences, is
discussed and related to teacher career theory. However, the more hopeful idea
of urban teacher thrivalis uncovered through narrative methodology. This
narrative study reveals three salient themes. First hope springs eternal is the
idea that sustaining hope supported the veteran teacher's career thrival. Next,
the extended education family is the notion that familial-like relationships at
school nourished the teacher's longevity. The third theme, creative autonomy,
reveals that by being empowered with opportunities for curriculum development
and instructional decision-making the teacher maintained her passion. Each theme
was influenced by the participant's internal dispositional factors and external
conditional factors. These factors are discussed. The above themes, combined
with deeply rooted caring relationships with students, proved to be the most
important aspects of the participant's sustained spirit. Furthermore, this study
illustrates how teacher narratives can act as counter-narratives to teacher
bashing through revealing the systemic impact that can be made by the career of
one thriving teacher. Implications for teachers, educational leaders, teacher
educators and researchers are discussed.
