Title: Teaching Elementary Economics Using Children's Literature
Authors: Julia Mittelberg
ID: openalex.W2892943170
URL: https://doi.org/10.4148/2637-4552.1089

Teaching economics to elementary aged children can be a challenge for classroom
teachers. Using popular children’s literature is an engaging and fun way to
involve students in learning important economic lessons while integrating the
content with language arts standards. This article will describe how to use
children’s books to teach economic ideas and it provides the reader with
numerous examples of popular literature that can be employed to effectively
teach concepts like opportunity cost, scarcity, and resources. Additionally,
recommendations for using the books and how to find appropriate texts by grade
level using existing on-line databases are included. Teaching economic concepts
in elementary classrooms is a task that teachers may find intimidating due to
common misconceptions about economics. Teachers may think of economics on a
national or global scale, dealing with large amounts of money, numbers, and
complicated mathematical processes, however the reality of what should be taught
in elementary is very different from this. When conceptualizing economics in
terms of college level economics or the newscaster’s reports on the nation’s
economic state teachers might wonder, “How can I possibly explain these ideas to
my 3rd graders?” First, teachers must look at the social studies standards set
by their state to really understand what is expected at each grade level. The
content is not difficult for students to understand if teachers are able to make
the concepts more concrete and applicable to the personal lives of their
students. As Dr. Yana van der Meulen Rodgers from Rutgers University states in
Newman’s (2010) article: “Decades of research in economics, education, and
early-childhood development have shown that young children enter the primary
grades with an experience-based knowledge of economics and that they are quite
capable of learning basic economics during the primary grades (para. 1).” This
should be encouraging for teachers as they strive to connect economic content to
the lives of young children. One way to make this link is through the use of
children’s literature to teach economic concepts. Many teachers have a routine
in place of reading literature aloud to students, so it is an easy transition to
move from making literacy-based connections such as phonics, vocabulary,
character studies, or context clues alone to also include content connections to
social studies concepts like economics (Newman, 2010). The key is for the
teacher to begin to look at books through an interdisciplinary lens. Some books
have an obvious connection to
