Title: Wishin' and Hopin': Femininity, Whiteness, and Voice in 1960s British Pop
Authors: Alexandra M. Apolloni
ID: openalex.W280971041
URL: https://escholarship.org/uc/item/33m350nx

This dissertation explores performances by British girl singers from the 1960s
to the present. I argue that vocal performances by singers such as Cilla Black,
Sandie Shaw, Dusty Springfield, Lulu, and Marianne Faithfull helped construct
emerging models of white femininity in the 1960s that continue to resonate in
pop vocal performances today. I show that, through vocal performance, these
singers envoice liminal spaces at the boundaries of social categories such as
race, gender, and class. My first two chapters explore aspirational performances
of femininity by Shaw, Black, and Springfield, from 1963-1969. I show how Shaw
and Black positioned themselves as solo singers, and argue that their vocal
styles reflected an emerging liberal model of feminine independence that was at
turns freeing and regressive. The following chapter argues that Springfield drew
on collaborations with African-American women, such as Martha Reeves, to
vocalize a different kind of feminine identity for herself, one grounded in a
sense of alterity, and to create a space for racial justice that was ultimately
limited by structural inequalities. The second pair of chapters look back at the
1960s through contemporary performances. I consider the current work of Lulu and
Faithfull as aging singers, and argue that they must contend not only with
cultural memories of their 1960s girlhood, but also with discourses of decline,
and with the physical impact of aging on the voice. I close with a chapter about
Candie Payne, Duffy, and Shelby Lynne, contemporary singers whose nostalgic use
of 1960s vocal techniques re-imagines mid-century ideals of femininity in the
present. My analyses are rooted in feminist theories of intersectionality and
performance, and methods from Voice Studies. I draw on a range of archival
sources, including fashion and music magazines, newspapers, memoirs, and
television footage.
