Title: Framing Eve: Contemporary Retellings Of Biblical Women For Young People
Authors: Elizabeth Gillhouse
ID: openalex.W2511103786
URL: https://doi.org/10.30707/etd2013.gillhouse.e

This dissertation examines the ideological implications of re-visioning Bible
stories for young readers in order to negotiate changing cultural attitudes
regarding gender. I begin by exploring three theories of retelling traditional
narratives including John Stephens and Robyn McCallum's discussion of
"reversion," Adrienne Rich's concept of "re-vision," and the Jewish tradition of
biblical Midrash. Stephens and McCallum's term "reversion" emphasizes the
inevitable cultural influence that occurs during the process of retelling an
existing narrative. Rich's discussion of "re-vision" advocates an active attempt
on the part of feminists to re-see traditional narratives that have historically
been used to oppress women. The Jewish tradition of Midrash illustrates a
religious approach to filling in the gaps of biblical narrative; feminist
midrash, a secularized version of the tradition, employs the practice to
negotiate changing ideologies of gender within a historically patriarchal
system. The discussion of these three approaches to retelling traditional
narratives explicates the complex negotiation of religious and feminist
ideologies at work in collections of narratives devoted to women in the Bible. I
then categorize five ideological patterns that appear in these collections.
Chapter II examines these ideological patterns as they appear in the
macrodiscourse, or packaging and paratext of the collections. In chapter III, I
move to an analysis of several trends that appear in the microdiscourse, or the
actually retelling of individual narratives. Chapter IV narrows the analysis to
narratives about a single biblical figure, Eve, and employs a close, comparative
reading of between the account in Genesis and various retellings of the creation
and the Fall for young readers. Chapter V explores the pedagogical ramifications
of incorporating retellings of Bible stories into the college classroom. Chapter
VII summarizes my findings and enumerates further analysis to be done with
religious texts for young readers.
