Title: A study of vocational identity of Hong Kong secondary students
Authors: Bik-ling Chan
ID: openalex.W1498605216
URL: https://doi.org/10.5353/th_b5017918

﻿This research adopted the social cognitive career theory (SCCT) and the career
developmental approach (e.g., Super’s life-space approach) to investigate
vocational identity of secondary school students in Hong Kong. The purposes of
current research were mainly (1) to examine vocational identity of Hong Kong
senior secondary students; (2) to develop a model of vocational identity to
outline the relationships of achievement-related motivational factors (i.e.,
self-efficacy, goal orientation and causal attribution) to vocational identity,
and the mediating relationship of hope to vocational identity, for senior
secondary school students in Hong Kong; and (3) to explore students’ perceptions
of personal and contextual factors to career development.&#13;\n&#13;\nThe
current research was carried out in three stages, using a mixed quantitative and
qualitative research design. Prior to the main study, a pilot study was
conducted to a small group of participants (N=143) to test the reliability and
validity of the questionnaire. Study One was the main study to examine the
hypothesized model of vocational identity. A total of 1,866 students randomly
selected from 11 secondary schools completed the questionnaire. The findings
supported the proposed model of vocational identity which identified personal
control, performance goal orientation, learning goal orientation, self-efficacy
as significant predictors of hope, which in turn significantly predicted the
outcome of vocational identity. The findings also supported the role of hope as
a mediator.&#13;\n&#13;\nStudy Two was a qualitative study aiming to explore the
participants’ perceptions of the factors identified in Study One, and of the
contextual factors which influenced their vocational identity development. Focus
group interviews were conducted to the participants (N=23) who completed the
questionnaire in Study One. The qualitative findings revealed that appreciations
and supports from family, school, peers, graduates and society were significant
for adolescents’ vocational identity development.&#13;\n&#13;\nThe findings of
the current research were discussed in light of theoretical and practical
contributions. At the theoretical level, it developed a model of vocational
identity highlighting the contributions of personal factors such as self-
efficacy, personal control, learning goal orientation, performance goal
orientation and hope to adolescents’ career development. At the practical level,
the findings pointed to the need of developing a comprehensive student guidance
program which integrated personal developmental guidance with career guidance.
Such program needs to focus on developing students’ achievement-related
motivation and hope. Further, a favorable school learning environment and
supports of family, peers and society are salient to secondary students’ career
development. The strengths and limitations of the current research and direction
for further research were also discussed.
