Title: The Australian beachspace : flagging the spaces of Australian beach texts
Authors: Elizabeth Ellison
ID: openalex.W40443642
URL: 

The Australian beach is a significant component of the Australian culture and a
way of life. The Australian Beachspace explores existing research about the
Australian beach from a cultural and Australian studies perspective. Initially,
the beach in Australian studies has been established within a binary opposition.
Fiske, Hodge, and Turner (1987) pioneered the concept of the beach as a mythic
space, simultaneously beautiful but abstract. In comparison, Meaghan Morris
(1998) suggested that the beach was in fact an ordinary or everyday space. The
research intervenes in previous discussions, suggesting that the Australian
beach needs to be explored in spatial terms as well as cultural ones. The thesis
suggests the beach is more than these previously established binaries and uses
Soja's theory of Thirdspace (1996) to posit the term beachspace as a way of
describing this complex site. The beachspace is a lived space that encompasses
both the mythic and ordinary and more.&#13;\n&#13;\nA variety of texts have been
explored in this work, both film and literature. The thesis examines textual
representations of the Australian beach using Soja's Thirdspace as a frame to
reveal the complexities of the Australian beach through five thematic chapters.
Some of the texts discussed include works by Tim Winton's Breath (2008) and
Land's Edge (1993), Robert Drewe's short story collections The Bodysurfers
(1987) and The Rip (2008), and films such as Newcastle (dir. Dan Castle 2008)
and Blackrock (dir. Steve Vidler 1997).&#13;\n&#13;\nUltimately The Australian
Beachspace illustrates that the multiple meanings of the beach's representations
are complex and yet frequently fail to capture the layered reality of the
Australian beach. The Australian beach is best described as a beachspace, a
complex space that allows for the mythic and/or/both ordinary at once.
