Title: Back to the Future: The Short, Happy Life of the Law and Society Movement
Authors: David M. Trubek
ID: openalex.W2626356139
URL: https://ir.law.fsu.edu/lr/vol18/iss1/1

The Twenty-Fifth Anniversary Meeting of the Law and Society Association: The Ice
Cream Social The family has returned to Madison, Wisconsin where it all started.
The old-timers are in a mood for celebration and self-congratulation. The past
presidents are serving ice cream to a huge crowd of people from all over the
world. These founding fathers (the first female president is still in office and
isn't yet eligible to serve ice cream) look pleased. This is a world they have
made. It is full of old friends, recent students, ardent disciples, a few
critics who have at least taken them seriously, and some strangers who
(probably) know who they are. To each and all they scoop out free ice cream made
by the University of Wisconsin and paid for by the association they struggled to
create. It is a charming scene: modest (no caviar, no champagne), friendly (with
each cone a kind owrd or two to all), egalitarian (one scoop for each). For a
moment, everyone forgets the world outside. Put aside are the scars that family
members bear from the struggle to create and maintain this curious project.
There have been disappointments, frustrations, no little rage. Some thought they
would make brilliant careers in law and other disciplines, only to encounter
hostility and indifference. Some thought they would be able to mobilize the
money that is needed for empirical research, only to find that funding sources
can be indifferent to scholarship that doesn't support conclusions already
reached. Some thought students would be fascinated by the insights they could
offer on the role of law in society, only to find that students wanted tips on
how to pick juries. Some expected to reform American society through law, only
to find America wanted little reform and thought it had too much law. But at the
ice cream social, all these disappointments could be put aside. The family had
survived, and that was enough.
