Title: Electronic Literacy: Teaching Literary Reading through the Digital Medium
Authors: Robert Rozema
ID: openalex.W2336188974
URL: https://scholarworks.wmich.edu/dissertations/1300

Over the last decade, digital technology has become an increasingly important
part of education. In the discipline of English language arts, digital
technology has been enlisted to teach writing, as the word processor and more
recently, the World Wide Web, have provided new tools and new publishing
opportunities for student writers. The presence of digital technology is less
pronounced, however, in literature instruction in secondary schools. In both
theoretical and practical discussions of digital technology and literature, the
two mediums have been conceived as radically different. This dissertation argues
that the digital medium, and more specifically the World Wide Web, can support
literature instruction at the secondary level. It begins by identifying two
central concerns that have marked historical and contemporary approaches to
literature instruction: concern for the text and concern for the reader. Next,
through an examination of hypertext, it proposes that the digital medium can
meet both concerns, and supplies a theoretical model for implementing digital
technology in the literature curriculum.\nSubsequent chapters illustrate how
this model functions in a practical context by drawing on action research
conducted in a secondary classroom. Specifically, these chapters describe how
two Web-based learning tools, the literary MOO and the WebQuest, were used to
reinforce reader-oriented and text-oriented literature instruction. The literary
MOO, used in conjunction with the novel Brave New World , helped students evoke
and elaborate on the story world of thetext, make personal connections between
the text and their own lives, and discuss the text in an egalitarian and
collaborative way. The WebQuest, used in conjunction with the novel Heart of
Darkness , helped students learn about critical theory and read the text in an
analytical and text-centered way. Thedissertation concludes by considering how
English language arts teachers might best be trained to integrated Web-based
technology. Drawing on case studies of four intern teachers, this final chapter
argues that teacher educators must equip their students to use technology in
ways that are practical, as well as theoretically sound.
