Title: D.L.Espelage, S.M.Swearer (Eds.), Bullying in American schools: A social‐ecological perspective on prevention and intervention, Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ, ISBN: 0‐8058‐4560‐7, 2004385 pages, price $45.00 (Paperback); $99.95 (Cloth)
Authors: Lisa Piejak
ID: openalex.W2749631013
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adolescence.2004.06.003

This volume, edited by Dorothy Espelage, Associate Professor of Counseling
Psychology at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, and Susan Swearer,
Assistant Professor of School Psychology at the University of Nebraska, Lincoln,
focuses on the complex relationships between the individual, family, peer group,
school, community, and culture that result in bullying behavior. The editors
assert that it is essential to understand the social-ecological systems that
produce and maintain bullying and victimization in order to establish effective
prevention and intervention programs. They state as their aim that this book
will assist educators and mental health professionals in making data-based
decisions regarding prevention/intervention programs. They emphasize that
schools must conduct comprehensive, multi-contextual assessments to determine
the most appropriate prevention/intervention program to fit each school's own
unique ecology. Contributors to the volume include researchers and clinicians
from the fields of developmental psychology, social psychology, counseling
psychology, school psychology, and clinical psychology. The book is divided into
five parts, each focusing on different characteristics associated with bullying.
Each chapter includes a summary discussing implications for translating research
into practice. Part I focuses on individual characteristics associated with
bullying, including gender differences, empathy and caring, and internalizing
problems. It is concluded that interventions must address not only the obvious
externalizing symptoms but also internalizing symptoms such as depression,
anxiety, hopelessness, and locus of control. Part II focuses on peer
characteristics, including peer groups, peer ecologies, and a discussion of
sociometry as a method to study social networks. Developmental aspects of the
role of the peer group as a socializing agent during the early adolescent period
are also discussed. It is noted that bullying can be used as a strategy to
achieve dominance status during the transition from elementary school to middle
school. Part III focuses on classroom characteristics, including teacher
attitudes and the influence of these attitudes on school climate. Addressing
developmental trends in bullying, there is also a discussion of aggression in
preschool and kindergarten children. Social relationships among bullies and
victims with their peers and teachers are also examined. Classroom ecologies,
including peer inclusion, teacher monitoring, teacher modeling of caring and
trust, and parent–classroom relationships are also discussed as part of the
classroom context that can discourage aggression and bullying. Part IV focuses
on factors outside the classroom, including overall school climate, social
support in the lives of bullies and victims, family relationships, and
home–school collaboration to increase social competence. This part also includes
a detailed overview of several potential outcome measures to assess the
effectiveness of bullying-prevention programs. Finally, although several
bullying-prevention programs are mentioned throughout the book, Part V examines
three prevention programs in depth: The Elementary School Bully Busters Program,
the Expect Respect program, and the Olweus Bullying Prevention Program. A
strength of this final chapter is a discussion of potential challenges
confronting those attempting to establish prevention/intervention programs. This
volume represents a comprehensive and insightful contribution to understanding
and addressing the development and maintenance of bullying and victimization in
our schools, and is an excellent resource for anyone interested in implementing
effective prevention/intervention programs to make our schools safer for our
students.
