Title: Dignity and the Eye of the Beholder
Authors: Harvey Max Chochinov
ID: openalex.W1997789967
URL: https://doi.org/10.1200/jco.2004.12.095

Mr. J was a 67-year-old man with an endstage gastrointestinal malignancy. Having
decided he no longer wished to go on living, he had gone on a hunger strike,
precipitating an admission to an inpatient tertiary palliative care unit. He
reported that, aside from some minor discomforts, his symptom management was
quite reasonable. Psychiatric consultation was initiated to determine if
depression might be a factor influencing his wish to die. While he was not
overtly suicidal, and in fact seemed ambivalent about his wish to die, he did
state, “if I were in a European country where I could ‘press the button now,’ I
would.” After careful evaluation, it was determined that rather than depression,
the driving force behind his desire for death was a sense that life no longer
held purpose, meaning, nor hope. While he spoke of a lingering wish to
participate in various life activities, he bemoaned the fact that his body was
simply too weak and too ill to allow him to do so. That being the case, he
expressed the conviction that living had become redundant, his life had no
worth, and there was little reason for him to carry on. How can we offer comfort
to patients whose distress is primarily in the realm of the existential, or
beyond the reach of an easily administered psychopharmaceutical or analgesic
drug? While these matters are often deferred to the expertise of pastoral care
professionals, there is a growing movement—particularly in reference to dying
patients—for physicians to expand their caring with attentiveness to
psychosocial, existential, or spiritual suffering. In the absence of a clinical
depression or formal psychiatric disorder, the paucity of therapeutic options or
formatted approaches can leave oncology practitioners at somewhat of a loss.
There may be aspects of despair toward the end of life that may be inherent to
the dying process itself. If such distress is not primarily an aberration of
neurochemistry, but rather reflects a paucity of hope, meaning, and self worth,
what can be done to safeguard or enhance those life-sustaining attributes? And
if loss of meaning, hope, and self-worth are the essence of such despair, what
implications does this have for palliative care providers?
