Title: Empathic Engagement with Narrative Fictions
Authors: Amy Coplan
ID: openalex.W2085646006
URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-594x.2004.00147.x

There is still little consensus among scholars has not yet been brought to bear
on the philoregarding how best to characterize the relationsophical debate
regarding readers' relationship between readers of fictional narratives and
ships to fictional characters. In this section, I the characters in those
narratives.' Part of the discuss several studies that examine the activproblem
is that many of the explanatory ities involved in narrative comprehension. This
concepts used in the debate-concepts like research provides an important source
of empiridentification and empathy-are somewhat ical support for the claim that
adopting the vague or ambiguous. In this article, I consider perspective of
fictional characters typically some recent relevant empirical research on text
plays an important part in our engagement with processing and narrative
comprehension and narratives. argue for a pluralist account of character Several
recent empirical studies indicate that engagement, in which empathy plays an
importreaders tend to adopt a position within the spatioant role. In Section I,
I review several empirical temporal framework of narratives that is based
studies that strongly suggest that readers often on the position of the
protagonist.2 In a repreadopt the perspective of one or more of the sentative
study, Rinck and Bower ran a series of characters in fictional narratives. In
Section II, experiments on the focus of readers' attention.3 I turn to the
concept of empathy and provide an They had readers memorize the diagram of a
explanation of empathy based on models and building and objects located within
it. Readers research in empirical psychology. I focus in then read narratives
describing characters' activparticular on self-other differentiation, a critical
ities and movements in that building. While feature of empathy that has been
underemphareading, they were probed with target sentences sized in the
literature. Next I discuss two referring to memorized objects within the
buildpsychological phenomena that are closely ing's rooms. The consistent
finding was that related to empathy and often confused or readers were able to
process the target sentences conflated with it: emotional contagion and
describing objects close to the current location sympathy. In the final section
of the paper, I of the protagonist much faster than target senemploy the account
of empathy developed in tences describing objects that were farther away Section
II to address Noel Carroll's objections from the protagonist or that had been
visited by to the view that readers typically empathize the protagonist earlier
in the narrative. Based on with fictional characters. this finding, Rinck and
Bower concluded that readers were experiencing the narrative from the
spatiotemporal standpoint of the protagonist. In
