Title: AI for the Open-World: the Learning Principles
Authors: Jianyu Zhang
ID: 2504.14751
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.14751

Abstract:
During the past decades, numerous successes of AI has been made on "specific capabilities", named closed-world, such as artificial environments or specific real-world tasks. This well-defined narrow capability brings two nice benefits, a clear criterion of success and the opportunity to collect a lot of examples. The criteria not only reveal whether a machine has achieved a goal, but reveal how the machine falls short of the goal. As a result, human designers can fix the problems one after the other until the machine is deemed good enough for the task. Furthermore, the large set of collected examples reduces the difficulty of this problem-fixing process (by the central limit theorem).
  Do the success in closed-world translate into broad open-world, where a machine is required to perform any task that a human could possibly undertake with fewer examples and less priori knowledge from human designers? No. Because competence in a specific task provides little insight in handling other tasks, the valuable criteria for specific tasks become helpless when handling broader unseen tasks. Furthermore, due to the shortage of examples in unseen tasks, central limit theorem does not stand on our side. At the end, human designers lose the oscilloscope to "hack" an AI system for the open-world.
  Achieving AI for the open-world requires unique learning principles and innovated techniques, which are different from the ones in building AI for the closed-world. This thesis explores necessary learning principles required to construct AI for the open-world, including rich features (analogy a large tool box), disentangled representation (an organized tool box), and inference-time learning (a tool-savvy hand). Driven by the learning principles, this thesis further proposes techniques to use the learning principles, conducts enormous large-scale experiments to verify the learning principles.
