Title: FREE SPACES: IDENTITY, EXPERIENCE AND DEMOCRACY IN CLASSICAL ATHENS
Authors: Kōstas Vlassopoulos
ID: openalex.W1997364599
URL: https://doi.org/10.1017/s0009838807000031

Most modern works on Greek history accept a categorical distinction between
different identities and statuses in classical Athens: there was a deep chasm
between the male citizens' club and those excluded: foreigners, slaves and
women; and the identity of male citizen, slave, foreigner and woman was clear,
well defined, easy to establish, immutable and unchallenged. 1 Admittedly, this
is not simply a modern construction: there are innumerable references in the
ancient texts, which present this view of identity and make it a legitimate
perspective for modern scholars to adopt. 2 These images created by ancient
sources became acceptable to scholars belonging to very different traditions and
schools. For those scholars who believe that politics can be best understood
through a study of institutions, what matters primarily is the distinction
between those who have the right to participate in these institutions and those
who do not. 3 Accordingly, it was easy to accept the existence of a clear
distinction between the citizens and everybody else. For those who accept a
structuralist perspective, the polarities between citizen and metic, free and
slave, Greek and barbarian, or men and women offered a fruitful way to apply
their approach to Greek history. 4 For those who accept status and order as
essential categories of analysis, the distinction between different status
groups becomes essential in an analysis of Greek society. 5 Finally, for those
who work within a tradition of legal history, the clear legal distinctions are
the essential means of interpretation. 6 It is the aim of this article to
challenge these long-entrenched assumptions. I want to argue that the
distinction between citizens, metics and slaves was often difficult to establish
in Athens; that this was connected to the functions of Athenian democracy; that
citizens, metics and slaves formed mixed and interacting cultures in
collaboration and conflict; and that these interactions were created and enabled
by what I will call free spaces. This discussion will raise a second important
issue: the interpretation of Athenian democracy. I will argue that many of the
current approaches to Athenian democracy have a strong elitist perspective and
that we have to turn our attention to a bottom-down perspective; the concept of
free spaces can play an important role in changing perspective.
