Title: Reflections: A Theatrical Journey Into The Lives Of Adolescent Girls
Authors: Leah E. Page
ID: openalex.W2765298104
URL: https://stars.library.ucf.edu/etd/3287

Adolescence is a difficult time for young women. Their bodies are changing and
they are being asked to conform to a new set of feminine standards if they are
to be accepted (Pipher 39). Studies have found that girls experience a decrease
in self-esteem during this time. They are less likely to speak their minds
openly and honestly, which can lead to depression and a feeling of falseness. As
young women attempt to comprehend this turbulent time in their lives, they often
find strength through positive relationships with others as well as from their
own knowledge and self-awareness. Reflections is a one-woman show that
investigates the current challenges associated with adolescence. The play uses
short monologues as well as songs from musical theatre repertoire to tell the
story of three separate and unique women. The protagonist of Reflections is an
eleven-year-old girl whose personality and sense of self changes drastically
during the course of the show. At the beginning of the show, she speaks her mind
freely and openly and is unafraid to express her true feelings. When she
discovers there are consequences to acting this way, she immediately alters her
behavior to ensure her peers accept her. When she witnesses her sister's
strength and becomes aware of her mother's intelligence, she realizes she no
longer wants to act in ways that do not reflect her true feelings. Her sixteen-
year-old sister wants so badly to be accepted that she has begun altering her
appearance in dangerous ways in order to fit in. Their mother is struggling to
comprehend how to raise two daughters in a culture that does little to support
and nurture adolescent girls. Reflections: A Theatrical Look at the Lives of
Adolescent Girls outlines each characters distinct journey, using research and
analysis to support their stories. In the end it offers advice on how to prevent
young women from losing their sense of self during adolescence. This part of the
document will present a companion piece to the production in the form of a
theatre workshop. This workshop will give young women the opportunity to explore
important issues in a safe space. Participants will be able to express their
thoughts and feelings without fear of retribution and can begin to investigate
ways to challenge social forces that oppress them.
