Title: 'Bananas, bastards and victims?': hybrid reflections on cultural belonging in intercountry adoptee narratives
Authors: Gray, Kim Michele
ID: openalex.W2275465133
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/1959.13/37897

Intercountry adoption emerged in Australia in the1970s, at the end of the
Vietnam War and with each new decade the adoption ‘community’ and broader
society have become more aware of the challenges and complexities of the adoptee
experience. It is an area where contemporary preoccupations with issues of
identity, kinship relations and concerns about ‘race’ and cultural belonging are
being played out. Research on intercountry adoption has, until recent years,
been primarily conducted by researchers in the professions of psychology, social
work, law and child development. As a consequence these professions have to a
large extent influenced and driven public debate and policy in this area. Issues
about cultural and racial identity have generally been discussed and
problematised either at an individual or familial level ¬how adoptees negotiate
issues of racial difference in particular socio-political, historical and
cultural contexts is usually missing from these accounts. As intercountry
adoption is intricately connected to society’s ideas about race, culture,
ethnicity, kinship and belonging -to family and to nation -the disciplines of
sociology and anthropology have an important research role to play. This study
seeks to problematise the narrow definition of identity that adoptees are
usually subject to, attempting to move beyond essentialist notions about the
‘loss of identity’ and ‘loss of culture’ associated with the adoption experience
which has tended to promote a discourse of victimisation. Rather, the study asks
questions about how particular discourses of race, adoption and identity have
impacted on adoptees’ lives and the different modes of belonging adoptees employ
to manage their positions of difference. This is a comparative qualitative study
using multiple methods of social inquiry. It focuses on two core groups of
Australian intercountry adoptees -an adolescent and an adult group -who were
born in Vietnam, Korea, Sri Lanka and Malaysia. Their life histories are
compared by placing their experiences in the broader socio-political and
historical contexts of Australia’s immigration policies, adoption policies and
history of race relations. Their hybrid experiences are also compared to some
transracial adoptees in other Western nations and to some other transnational
groups, within the broader body of work on postcolonial identity construction,
in an effort to illuminate how intercountry adoptees’ share the ‘third space’
with others who also live through issues about cultural authenticity and the
essentialism often associated with identity formation. The study concludes with
an alternative reading of the intercountry adoptee experience. It suggests that
some adoptees are managing to (re)invent and (re)define their fluid, hybrid
identities within the broader context of culturally diverse youth and adults in
multicultural Australia and by their membership within other diasporic
movements. The study points to the importance of appropriate social support
including support from peer groups, family, other adoptees, and the significance
of place to adoptees’ sense of belonging. ‘Cultural identity’, as the often
quoted Stuart Hall (1990:225) suggests, “is a matter of ‘becoming’ as well as of
‘being’” and “it belongs to the future as much as to the past”.
