Title: The Use of Newspapers for Teaching Language Arts and Reading
Authors: Roy L. Gillis
ID: openalex.W2311734045
URL: https://dc.etsu.edu/etd/2685

The problem of this study was to determine if achievement scores in reading and
language arts could be increased for students who participated in the newspapers
in education program. Ninety-three seventh grade students were selected for the
study; seventy-seven students completed the study, sixteen students were lost
due to attrition. Two experimental groups and one control group were selected by
random assignment from the seventh grade class at one school. The Metropolitan
Achievement Test was administered to all students as a pretest. After completion
of the experimental treatment in two successive twelve week periods, the
Metropolitan Instructional Test for reading and language arts were administered
as posttests. The analysis of covariance was the statistical measure utilized to
test seven null hypotheses. The effects of participating in the newspaper in
education program was determined by comparing the posttest scores of the
experimental groups and control group on the Metropolitan Instructional Test for
reading and language arts. The appropriate pretest scores were used as a
covariate of the posttest to control for any initial inequalities among the
groups. Results at the .05 level of significance were used as criteria for
accepting the hypotheses. Based on the findings of the study, a significant
difference (p < .001) was found between the experimental groups and the control
group on reading comprehension. It can be concluded that participating in the
newspaper treatment enabled students to significantly increase the reading
comprehension test scores in the study. Although the other subtest scores for
reading skills were not significant, the adjusted mean scores of the
experimental groups and the control group were approximately equal. Scores on
the language arts subtests indicated significant differences in usage, spelling,
and study skills. Contrary to expectations, the control group scored
significantly higher than either experimental group. It can be concluded that
participation in the basal text instruction was more successful in increasing
student scores on the Metropolitan Achievement Test than participation in the
NIE program for language arts. The study also revealed that participation in the
NIE program did not produce any significantly different test scores between
sexes.
