Title: Toward a consistent performance evaluation for defect prediction models
Authors: Xutong Liu, Shiran Liu, Zhaoqiang Guo, Peng Zhag, Yibiao Yang et al.
ID: 2302.00394
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.00394

Abstract:
In defect prediction community, many defect prediction models have been proposed
and indeed more new models are continuously being developed. However, there is
no consensus on how to evaluate the performance of a newly proposed model. In
this paper, we aim to propose MATTER, a fraMework towArd a consisTenT
pErformance compaRison, which makes model performance directly comparable across
different studies. We take three actions to build a consistent evaluation
framework for defect prediction models. First, we propose a simple and
easy-to-use unsupervised baseline model ONE (glObal baseliNe modEl) to provide
"a single point of comparison". Second, we propose using the SQA-effort-aligned
threshold setting to make a fair comparison. Third, we suggest reporting the
evaluation results in a unified way and provide a set of core performance
indicators for this purpose, thus enabling an across-study comparison to attain
real progress. The experimental results show that MATTER can serve as an
effective framework to support a consistent performance evaluation for defect
prediction models and hence can help determine whether a newly proposed defect
prediction model is practically useful for practitioners and inform the real
progress in the road of defect prediction. Furthermore, when applying MATTER to
evaluate the representative defect prediction models proposed in recent years,
we find that most of them (if not all) are not superior to the simple baseline
model ONE in terms of the SQA-effort awareness prediction performance. This
reveals that the real progress in defect prediction has been overestimated. We
hence recommend that, in future studies, when any new defect prediction model is
proposed, MATTER should be used to evaluate its actual usefulness (on the same
benchmark test data sets) to advance scientific progress in defect prediction.
