Title: ISimDL: Importance Sampling-Driven Acceleration of Fault Injection Simulations for Evaluating the Robustness of Deep Learning
Authors: Alessio Colucci, Andreas Steininger, Muhammad Shafique
ID: 2303.08035
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08035

Abstract:
Deep Learning (DL) systems have proliferated in many applications, requiring
specialized hardware accelerators and chips. In the nano-era, devices have
become increasingly more susceptible to permanent and transient faults.
Therefore, we need an efficient methodology for analyzing the resilience of
advanced DL systems against such faults, and understand how the faults in neural
accelerator chips manifest as errors at the DL application level, where faults
can lead to undetectable and unrecoverable errors. Using fault injection, we can
perform resilience investigations of the DL system by modifying neuron weights
and outputs at the software-level, as if the hardware had been affected by a
transient fault. Existing fault models reduce the search space, allowing faster
analysis, but requiring a-priori knowledge on the model, and not allowing
further analysis of the filtered-out search space. Therefore, we propose ISimDL,
a novel methodology that employs neuron sensitivity to generate importance
sampling-based fault-scenarios. Without any a-priori knowledge of the
model-under-test, ISimDL provides an equivalent reduction of the search space as
existing works, while allowing long simulations to cover all the possible
faults, improving on existing model requirements. Our experiments show that the
importance sampling provides up to 15x higher precision in selecting critical
faults than the random uniform sampling, reaching such precision in less than
100 faults. Additionally, we showcase another practical use-case for importance
sampling for reliable DNN design, namely Fault Aware Training (FAT). By using
ISimDL to select the faults leading to errors, we can insert the faults during
the DNN training process to harden the DNN against such faults. Using importance
sampling in FAT reduces the overhead required for finding faults that lead to a
predetermined drop in accuracy by more than 12x.
