Title: Information-Theoretic Testing and Debugging of Fairness Defects in Deep Neural Networks
Authors: Verya Monjezi, Ashutosh Trivedi, Gang Tan, Saeid Tizpaz-Niari
ID: 2304.04199
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.04199

Abstract:
The deep feedforward neural networks (DNNs) are increasingly deployed in
socioeconomic critical decision support software systems. DNNs are exceptionally
good at finding minimal, sufficient statistical patterns within their training
data. Consequently, DNNs may learn to encode decisions -- amplifying existing
biases or introducing new ones -- that may disadvantage protected
individuals/groups and may stand to violate legal protections. While the
existing search based software testing approaches have been effective in
discovering fairness defects, they do not supplement these defects with
debugging aids -- such as severity and causal explanations -- crucial to help
developers triage and decide on the next course of action. Can we measure the
severity of fairness defects in DNNs? Are these defects symptomatic of improper
training or they merely reflect biases present in the training data? To answer
such questions, we present DICE: an information-theoretic testing and debugging
framework to discover and localize fairness defects in DNNs. The key goal of
DICE is to assist software developers in triaging fairness defects by ordering
them by their severity. Towards this goal, we quantify fairness in terms of
protected information (in bits) used in decision making. A quantitative view of
fairness defects not only helps in ordering these defects, our empirical
evaluation shows that it improves the search efficiency due to resulting
smoothness of the search space. Guided by the quantitative fairness, we present
a causal debugging framework to localize inadequately trained layers and neurons
responsible for fairness defects. Our experiments over ten DNNs, developed for
socially critical tasks, show that DICE efficiently characterizes the amounts of
discrimination, effectively generates discriminatory instances, and localizes
layers/neurons with significant biases.
