Title: No More Manual Tests? Evaluating and Improving ChatGPT for Unit Test Generation
Authors: Zhiqiang Yuan, Yiling Lou, Mingwei Liu, Shiji Ding, Kaixin Wang et al.
ID: 2305.04207
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.04207

Abstract:
Unit testing is essential in detecting bugs in functionally-discrete program
units. Manually writing high-quality unit tests is time-consuming and laborious.
Although traditional techniques can generate tests with reasonable coverage,
they exhibit low readability and cannot be directly adopted by developers.
Recent work has shown the large potential of large language models (LLMs) in
unit test generation, which can generate more human-like and meaningful test
code. ChatGPT, the latest LLM incorporating instruction tuning and reinforcement
learning, has performed well in various domains. However, It remains unclear how
effective ChatGPT is in unit test generation. In this work, we perform the first
empirical study to evaluate ChatGPT's capability of unit test generation.
Specifically, we conduct a quantitative analysis and a user study to
systematically investigate the quality of its generated tests regarding the
correctness, sufficiency, readability, and usability. The tests generated by
ChatGPT still suffer from correctness issues, including diverse compilation
errors and execution failures. Still, the passing tests generated by ChatGPT
resemble manually-written tests by achieving comparable coverage, readability,
and even sometimes developers' preference. Our findings indicate that generating
unit tests with ChatGPT could be very promising if the correctness of its
generated tests could be further improved. Inspired by our findings above, we
propose ChatTESTER, a novel ChatGPT-based unit test generation approach, which
leverages ChatGPT itself to improve the quality of its generated tests.
ChatTESTER incorporates an initial test generator and an iterative test refiner.
Our evaluation demonstrates the effectiveness of ChatTESTER by generating 34.3%
more compilable tests and 18.7% more tests with correct assertions than the
default ChatGPT.
