Title: Automatic Unit Test Generation for Deep Learning Frameworks based on API Knowledge
Authors: Arunkaleeshwaran Narayanan, Nima Shiri harzevili, Junjie Wang, Lin Shi, Moshi Wei et al.
ID: 2307.00404
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.00404

Abstract:
Many automatic unit test generation tools that can generate unit test cases with
high coverage over a program have been proposed. However, most of these tools
are ineffective on deep learning (DL) frameworks due to the fact that many of
deep learning APIs expect inputs that follow specific API knowledge. To fill
this gap, we propose MUTester to generate unit test cases for APIs of deep
learning frameworks by leveraging the API constraints mined from the
corresponding API documentation and the API usage patterns mined from code
fragments in Stack Overflow (SO). Particularly, we first propose a set of 18
rules for mining API constraints from the API documents. We then use the
frequent itemset mining technique to mine the API usage patterns from a large
corpus of machine learning API related code fragments collected from SO.
Finally, we use the above two types of API knowledge to guide the test
generation of existing test generators for deep learning frameworks. To evaluate
the performance of MUTester, we first collect 1,971 APIs from four widely-used
deep learning frameworks (i.e., Scikit-learn, PyTorch, TensorFlow, and CNTK) and
for each API, we further extract its API knowledge, i.e., API constraints and
API usage. Given an API, MUTester combines its API knowledge with existing test
generators (e.g., search-based test generator PyEvosuite and random test
generator PyRandoop) to generate test cases to test the API. Results of our
experiment show that MUTester can significantly improve the corresponding test
generation methods and the improvement in code coverage is 15.7% to 27.0% on
average. In addition, it can help reduce around 19.0% of invalid tests generated
by the existing test generators. Our user study with 16 developers further
demonstrates the practicality of MUTester in generating test cases for deep
learning frameworks.
