Title: Towards Modeling Software Quality of Virtual Reality Applications from Users' Perspectives
Authors: Shuqing Li, Lili Wei, Yepang Liu, Cuiyun Gao, Shing-Chi Cheung et al.
ID: 2308.06783
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.06783

Abstract:
Virtual Reality (VR) technology has become increasingly popular in recent years
as a key enabler of the Metaverse. VR applications have unique characteristics,
including the revolutionized human-computer interaction mechanisms, that
distinguish them from traditional software. Hence, user expectations for the
software quality of VR applications diverge from those for traditional software.
Investigating these quality expectations is crucial for the effective
development and maintenance of VR applications, which remains an under-explored
area in prior research. To bridge the gap, we conduct the first large-scale
empirical study to model the software quality of VR applications from users'
perspectives. To this end, we analyze 1,132,056 user reviews of 14,150 VR
applications across seven app stores through a semiautomatic review mining
approach. We construct a taxonomy of 12 software quality attributes that are of
major concern to VR users. Our analysis reveals that the VR-specific quality
attributes are of utmost importance to users, which are closely related to the
most unique properties of VR applications like revolutionized interaction
mechanisms and immersive experiences. Our examination of relevant user
complaints reveals the major factors impacting user satisfaction with
VR-specific quality attributes. We identify that poor design or implementation
of the movement mechanisms, control mechanisms, multimedia systems, and physics,
can significantly degrade the user experience. Moreover, we discuss the
implications of VR quality assurance for both developers and researchers to shed
light on future work. For instance, we suggest developers implement sufficient
accessibility and comfort options for users with mobility limitations, sensory
impairments, and other specific needs to customize the interaction mechanisms.
Our datasets and results will be released to facilitate follow-up studies.
