Title: Manual Tests Do Smell! Cataloging and Identifying Natural Language Test Smells
Authors: Elvys Soares, Manoel Aranda, Naelson Oliveira, Márcio Ribeiro, Rohit Gheyi et al.
ID: 2308.01386
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.01386

Abstract:
Background: Test smells indicate potential problems in the design and
implementation of automated software tests that may negatively impact test code
maintainability, coverage, and reliability. When poorly described, manual tests
written in natural language may suffer from related problems, which enable their
analysis from the point of view of test smells. Despite the possible prejudice
to manually tested software products, little is known about test smells in
manual tests, which results in many open questions regarding their types,
frequency, and harm to tests written in natural language. Aims: Therefore, this
study aims to contribute to a catalog of test smells for manual tests. Method:
We perform a two-fold empirical strategy. First, an exploratory study in manual
tests of three systems: the Ubuntu Operational System, the Brazilian Electronic
Voting Machine, and the User Interface of a large smartphone manufacturer. We
use our findings to propose a catalog of eight test smells and identification
rules based on syntactical and morphological text analysis, validating our
catalog with 24 in-company test engineers. Second, using our proposals, we
create a tool based on Natural Language Processing (NLP) to analyze the subject
systems' tests, validating the results. Results: We observed the occurrence of
eight test smells. A survey of 24 in-company test professionals showed that
80.7% agreed with our catalog definitions and examples. Our NLP-based tool
achieved a precision of 92%, recall of 95%, and f-measure of 93.5%, and its
execution evidenced 13,169 occurrences of our cataloged test smells in the
analyzed systems. Conclusion: We contribute with a catalog of natural language
test smells and novel detection strategies that better explore the capabilities
of current NLP mechanisms with promising results and reduced effort to analyze
tests written in different idioms.
