Title: Effective Test Generation Using Pre-trained Large Language Models and Mutation Testing
Authors: Arghavan Moradi Dakhel, Amin Nikanjam, Vahid Majdinasab, Foutse Khomh, Michel C. Desmarais
ID: 2308.16557
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.16557

Abstract:
One of the critical phases in software development is software testing. Testing
helps with identifying potential bugs and reducing maintenance costs. The goal
of automated test generation tools is to ease the development of tests by
suggesting efficient bug-revealing tests. Recently, researchers have leveraged
Large Language Models (LLMs) of code to generate unit tests. While the code
coverage of generated tests was usually assessed, the literature has
acknowledged that the coverage is weakly correlated with the efficiency of tests
in bug detection. To improve over this limitation, in this paper, we introduce
MuTAP for improving the effectiveness of test cases generated by LLMs in terms
of revealing bugs by leveraging mutation testing. Our goal is achieved by
augmenting prompts with surviving mutants, as those mutants highlight the
limitations of test cases in detecting bugs. MuTAP is capable of generating
effective test cases in the absence of natural language descriptions of the
Program Under Test (PUTs). We employ different LLMs within MuTAP and evaluate
their performance on different benchmarks. Our results show that our proposed
method is able to detect up to 28% more faulty human-written code snippets.
Among these, 17% remained undetected by both the current state-of-the-art fully
automated test generation tool (i.e., Pynguin) and zero-shot/few-shot learning
approaches on LLMs. Furthermore, MuTAP achieves a Mutation Score (MS) of 93.57%
on synthetic buggy code, outperforming all other approaches in our evaluation.
Our findings suggest that although LLMs can serve as a useful tool to generate
test cases, they require specific post-processing steps to enhance the
effectiveness of the generated test cases which may suffer from syntactic or
functional errors and may be ineffective in detecting certain types of bugs and
testing corner cases PUTs.
