Title: A study on the impact of pre-trained model on Just-In-Time defect prediction
Authors: Yuxiang Guo, Xiaopeng Gao, Zhenyu Zhang, W. K. Chan, Bo Jiang
ID: 2309.02317
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.02317

Abstract:
Previous researchers conducting Just-In-Time (JIT) defect prediction tasks have
primarily focused on the performance of individual pre-trained models, without
exploring the relationship between different pre-trained models as backbones. In
this study, we build six models: RoBERTaJIT, CodeBERTJIT, BARTJIT, PLBARTJIT,
GPT2JIT, and CodeGPTJIT, each with a distinct pre-trained model as its backbone.
We systematically explore the differences and connections between these models.
Specifically, we investigate the performance of the models when using Commit
code and Commit message as inputs, as well as the relationship between training
efficiency and model distribution among these six models. Additionally, we
conduct an ablation experiment to explore the sensitivity of each model to
inputs. Furthermore, we investigate how the models perform in zero-shot and
few-shot scenarios. Our findings indicate that each model based on different
backbones shows improvements, and when the backbone's pre-training model is
similar, the training resources that need to be consumed are much more closer.
We also observe that Commit code plays a significant role in defect detection,
and different pre-trained models demonstrate better defect detection ability
with a balanced dataset under few-shot scenarios. These results provide new
insights for optimizing JIT defect prediction tasks using pre-trained models and
highlight the factors that require more attention when constructing such models.
Additionally, CodeGPTJIT and GPT2JIT achieved better performance than DeepJIT
and CC2Vec on the two datasets respectively under 2000 training samples. These
findings emphasize the effectiveness of transformer-based pre-trained models in
JIT defect prediction tasks, especially in scenarios with limited training data.
