Title: Test Case Generation and Test Oracle Support for Testing CPSs using Hybrid Models
Authors: Zahra Sadri-Moshkenani, Justin Bradley, Gregg Rothermel
ID: 2309.07994
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.07994

Abstract:
Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs) play a central role in the behavior of a wide
range of autonomous physical systems such as medical devices, autonomous
vehicles, and smart homes, many of which are safety-critical. CPSs are often
specified iteratively as a sequence of models at different levels that can be
tested via simulation systems at early stages of their development cycle. One
such model is a hybrid automaton; these are used frequently for CPS applications
and have the advantage of encapsulating both continuous and discrete CPS
behaviors. When testing CPSs, engineers can take advantage of these models to
generate test cases that target both types of these behaviors. Moreover, since
these models are constructed early in the development process for CPSs, they
allow test cases to be generated early in that process for those CPSs, even
before simulation models of the CPSs have been designed. One challenge when
testing CPSs is that these systems may operate differently even under an
identically applied test scenario. In such cases, we cannot employ test oracles
that use predetermined deterministic behaviors; instead, test oracles should
consider sets of desired behaviors in order to determine whether the CPS has
behaved appropriately. In this paper we present a test case generation
technique, HYTEST, that generates test cases based on hybrid models, accompanied
by appropriate test oracles, for use in testing CPSs early in their development
cycle. To evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of HYTEST, we conducted an
empirical study in which we applied the technique to several CPSs and measured
its ability to detect faults in those CPSs and the amount of time required to
perform the testing process. The results of the study show that HYTEST was able
to detect faults more effectively and efficiently than the baseline techniques
we compare it to.
