Title: A mobile digital device proficiency performance test for cognitive clinical research
Authors: Alan Cronemberger Andrade, Diógenes de Souza Bido, Ana Carolina Bottura de Barros, Walter Richard Boot, Paulo Henrique Ferreira Bertolucci
ID: 2310.01774
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01774

Abstract:
Mobile device proficiency is increasingly important for everyday living,
including to deliver healthcare services. Human-device interactions represent a
potential in cognitive neurology and aging research. Although traditional
pen-and-paper evaluations serve as valuable tools within public health
strategies for population-scale cognitive assessments, digital devices could
amplify cognitive assessment. However, even person-centered studies often fail
to incorporate measures of mobile device proficiency and research with digital
mobile technology frequently neglects these evaluations. Besides that, cognitive
screening, a fundamental part of brain health evaluation and a widely accepted
strategy to identify high-risk individuals vulnerable to cognitive impairment
and dementia, has research using digital devices for older adults in need for
standardization. To address this shortfall, the DigiTAU collaborative and
interdisciplinary project is creating refined methodological parameters for the
investigation of digital biomarkers. With careful consideration of cognitive
design elements, here we describe the open-source and performance-based Mobile
Device Abilities Test (MDAT), a simple, low-cost, and reproductible open-sourced
test framework. This result was achieved with a cross-sectional study population
sample of 101 low and middle-income subjects aged 20 to 79 years old. Partial
least squares structural equation modeling (PLS-SEM) was used to assess the
measurement of the construct. It was possible to achieve a reliable method with
internal consistency, good content validity related to digital competences, and
that does not have much interference with auto-perceived global functional
disability, health self-perception, and motor dexterity. Limitations for this
method are discussed and paths to improve and establish better standards are
highlighted.
