Title: RLTrace: Synthesizing High-Quality System Call Traces for OS Fuzz Testing
Authors: Wei Chen, Huaijin Wang, Weixi Gu, Shuai Wang
ID: 2310.02609
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.02609

Abstract:
Securing operating system (OS) kernel is one central challenge in today's cyber
security landscape. The cutting-edge testing technique of OS kernel is software
fuzz testing. By mutating the program inputs with random variations for
iterations, fuzz testing aims to trigger program crashes and hangs caused by
potential bugs that can be abused by the inputs. To achieve high OS code
coverage, the de facto OS fuzzer typically composes system call traces as the
input seed to mutate and to interact with OS kernels. Hence, quality and
diversity of the employed system call traces become the prominent factor to
decide the effectiveness of OS fuzzing. However, these system call traces to
date are generated with hand-coded rules, or by analyzing system call logs of OS
utility programs. Our observation shows that such system call traces can only
subsume common usage scenarios of OS system calls, and likely omit hidden bugs.
In this research, we propose a deep reinforcement learning-based solution,
called RLTrace, to synthesize diverse and comprehensive system call traces as
the seed to fuzz OS kernels. During model training, the deep learning model
interacts with OS kernels and infers optimal system call traces w.r.t. our
learning goal -- maximizing kernel code coverage. Our evaluation shows that
RLTrace outperforms other seed generators by producing more comprehensive system
call traces, subsuming system call corner usage cases and subtle dependencies.
By feeding the de facto OS fuzzer, SYZKALLER, with system call traces
synthesized by RLTrace, we show that SYZKALLER can achieve higher code coverage
for testing Linux kernels. Furthermore, RLTrace found one vulnerability in the
Linux kernel (version 5.5-rc6), which is publicly unknown to the best of our
knowledge by the time of writing.
