Title: Challenging Bug Prediction and Repair Models with Synthetic Bugs
Authors: Ali Reza Ibrahimzada, Yang Chen, Ryan Rong, Reyhaneh Jabbarvand
ID: 2310.02407
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.02407

Abstract:
Bugs are essential in software engineering; many research studies in the past
decades have been proposed to detect, localize, and repair bugs in software
systems. Effectiveness evaluation of such techniques requires complex bugs,
i.e., those that are hard to detect through testing and hard to repair through
debugging. From the classic software engineering point of view, a hard-to-repair
bug differs from the correct code in multiple locations, making it hard to
localize and repair. Hard-to-detect bugs, on the other hand, manifest themselves
under specific test inputs and reachability conditions. These two objectives,
i.e., generating hard-to-detect and hard-to-repair bugs, are mostly aligned; a
bug generation technique can change multiple statements to be covered only under
a specific set of inputs. However, these two objectives are conflicting for
learning-based techniques: A bug should have a similar code representation to
the correct code in the training data to challenge a bug prediction model to
distinguish them. The hard-to-repair bug definition remains the same but with a
caveat: the more a bug differs from the original code, the more distant their
representations are and easier to be detected. We propose BugFarm, to transform
arbitrary code into multiple complex bugs. BugFarm leverages LLMs to mutate code
in multiple locations (hard-to-repair). To ensure that multiple modifications do
not notably change the code representation, BugFarm analyzes the attention of
the underlying model and instructs LLMs to only change the least attended
locations (hard-to-detect). Our comprehensive evaluation of 435k+ bugs from over
1.9M mutants generated by BUGFARM and two alternative approaches demonstrates
our superiority in generating bugs that are hard to detect by learning-based bug
prediction approaches and hard-to-repair by state-of-the-art learning-based
program repair technique.
