Title: Automatic Generation of Test Cases based on Bug Reports: a Feasibility Study with Large Language Models
Authors: Laura Plein, Wendkûuni C. Ouédraogo, Jacques Klein, Tegawendé F. Bissyandé
ID: 2310.06320
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06320

Abstract:
Software testing is a core discipline in software engineering where a large
array of research results has been produced, notably in the area of automatic
test generation. Because existing approaches produce test cases that either can
be qualified as simple (e.g. unit tests) or that require precise specifications,
most testing procedures still rely on test cases written by humans to form test
suites. Such test suites, however, are incomplete: they only cover parts of the
project or they are produced after the bug is fixed. Yet, several research
challenges, such as automatic program repair, and practitioner processes, build
on the assumption that available test suites are sufficient. There is thus a
need to break existing barriers in automatic test case generation. While prior
work largely focused on random unit testing inputs, we propose to consider
generating test cases that realistically represent complex user execution
scenarios, which reveal buggy behaviour. Such scenarios are informally described
in bug reports, which should therefore be considered as natural inputs for
specifying bug-triggering test cases. In this work, we investigate the
feasibility of performing this generation by leveraging large language models
(LLMs) and using bug reports as inputs. Our experiments include the use of
ChatGPT, as an online service, as well as CodeGPT, a code-related pre-trained
LLM that was fine-tuned for our task. Overall, we experimentally show that bug
reports associated to up to 50% of Defects4J bugs can prompt ChatGPT to generate
an executable test case. We show that even new bug reports can indeed be used as
input for generating executable test cases. Finally, we report experimental
results which confirm that LLM-generated test cases are immediately useful in
software engineering tasks such as fault localization as well as patch
validation in automated program repair.
