Title: Reinforcement Learning from Automatic Feedback for High-Quality Unit Test Generation
Authors: Benjamin Steenhoek, Michele Tufano, Neel Sundaresan, Alexey Svyatkovskiy
ID: 2310.02368
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.02368

Abstract:
Software testing is a crucial aspect of software development, and the creation
of high-quality tests that adhere to best practices is essential for effective
maintenance. Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have gained popularity for
code generation, including the automated creation of test cases. However, these
LLMs are often trained on vast amounts of publicly available code, which may
include test cases that do not adhere to best practices and may even contain
test smells (anti-patterns). To address this issue, we propose a novel technique
called Reinforcement Learning from Static Quality Metrics (RLSQM). To begin, we
analyze the anti-patterns generated by the LLM and show that LLMs can generate
undesirable test smells. Thus, we train specific reward models for each static
quality metric, then utilize Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) to train models
for optimizing a single quality metric at a time. Furthermore, we amalgamate
these rewards into a unified reward model aimed at capturing different best
practices and quality aspects of tests. By comparing RL-trained models with
those trained using supervised learning, we provide insights into how reliably
utilize RL to improve test generation quality and into the effects of various
training strategies. Our experimental results demonstrate that the RL-optimized
model consistently generated high-quality test cases compared to the base LLM,
improving the model by up to 21%, and successfully generates nearly 100%
syntactically correct code. RLSQM also outperformed GPT-4 on four out of seven
metrics. This represents a significant step towards enhancing the overall
efficiency and reliability of software testing through Reinforcement Learning
and static quality metrics. Our data are available at
https://figshare.com/s/ded476c8d4c221222849.
