Title: Resilient Control of Networked Microgrids using Vertical Federated Reinforcement Learning: Designs and Real-Time Test-Bed Validations
Authors: Sayak Mukherjee, Ramij R. Hossain, Sheik M. Mohiuddin, Yuan Liu, Wei Du et al.
ID: 2311.12264
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.12264

Abstract:
Improving system-level resiliency of networked microgrids is an important aspect
with increased population of inverter-based resources (IBRs). This paper (1)
presents resilient control design in presence of adversarial cyber-events, and
proposes a novel federated reinforcement learning (Fed-RL) approach to tackle
(a) model complexities, unknown dynamical behaviors of IBR devices, (b) privacy
issues regarding data sharing in multi-party-owned networked grids, and (2)
transfers learned controls from simulation to hardware-in-the-loop test-bed,
thereby bridging the gap between simulation and real world. With these
multi-prong objectives, first, we formulate a reinforcement learning (RL)
training setup generating episodic trajectories with adversaries (attack signal)
injected at the primary controllers of the grid forming (GFM) inverters where RL
agents (or controllers) are being trained to mitigate the injected attacks. For
networked microgrids, the horizontal Fed-RL method involving distinct
independent environments is not appropriate, leading us to develop vertical
variant Federated Soft Actor-Critic (FedSAC) algorithm to grasp the
interconnected dynamics of networked microgrid. Next, utilizing OpenAI Gym
interface, we built a custom simulation set-up in GridLAB-D/HELICS co-simulation
platform, named Resilient RL Co-simulation (ResRLCoSIM), to train the RL agents
with IEEE 123-bus benchmark test systems comprising 3 interconnected microgrids.
Finally, the learned policies in simulation world are transferred to the
real-time hardware-in-the-loop test-bed set-up developed using high-fidelity
Hypersim platform. Experiments show that the simulator-trained RL controllers
produce convincing results with the real-time test-bed set-up, validating the
minimization of sim-to-real gap.
