Title: An empirical study of testing machine learning in the wild
Authors: Moses Openja, Foutse Khomh, Armstrong Foundjem, Zhen Ming,  Jiang et al.
ID: 2312.12604
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.12604

Abstract:
Recently, machine and deep learning (ML/DL) algorithms have been increasingly
adopted in many software systems. Due to their inductive nature, ensuring the
quality of these systems remains a significant challenge for the research
community. Unlike traditional software built deductively by writing explicit
rules, ML/DL systems infer rules from training data. Recent research in ML/DL
quality assurance has adapted concepts from traditional software testing, such
as mutation testing, to improve reliability. However, it is unclear if these
proposed testing techniques are adopted in practice, or if new testing
strategies have emerged from real-world ML deployments. There is little
empirical evidence about the testing strategies. To fill this gap, we perform
the first fine-grained empirical study on ML testing in the wild to identify the
ML properties being tested, the testing strategies, and their implementation
throughout the ML workflow. We conducted a mixed-methods study to understand ML
software testing practices. We analyzed test files and cases from 11 open-source
ML/DL projects on GitHub. Using open coding, we manually examined the testing
strategies, tested ML properties, and implemented testing methods to understand
their practical application in building and releasing ML/DL software systems.
Our findings reveal several key insights: 1.) The most common testing
strategies, accounting for less than 40%, are Grey-box and White-box methods,
such as Negative Testing, Oracle Approximation and Statistical Testing. 2.) A
wide range of 17 ML properties are tested, out of which only 20% to 30% are
frequently tested, including Consistency, Correctness}, and Efficiency. 3.) Bias
and Fairness is more tested in Recommendation, while Security & Privacy is
tested in Computer Vision (CV) systems, Application Platforms, and Natural
Language Processing (NLP) systems.
