Title: Comparing Effectiveness and Efficiency of Interactive Application Security Testing (IAST) and Runtime Application Self-Protection (RASP) Tools in a Large Java-based System
Authors: Aishwarya Seth, Saikath Bhattacharya, Sarah Elder, Nusrat Zahan, Laurie Williams
ID: 2312.17726
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.17726

Abstract:
Security resources are scarce, and practitioners need guidance in the effective
and efficient usage of techniques and tools available in the cybersecurity
industry. Two emerging tool types, Interactive Application Security Testing
(IAST) and Runtime Application Self-Protection (RASP), have not been thoroughly
evaluated against well-established counterparts such as Dynamic Application
Security Testing (DAST) and Static Application Security Testing (SAST). The goal
of this research is to aid practitioners in making informed choices about the
use of Interactive Application Security Testing (IAST) and Runtime Application
Self-Protection (RASP) tools through an analysis of their effectiveness and
efficiency in comparison with different vulnerability detection and prevention
techniques and tools. We apply IAST and RASP on OpenMRS, an open-source
Java-based online application. We compare the efficiency and effectiveness of
IAST and RASP with techniques applied on OpenMRS in prior work. We measure
efficiency and effectiveness in terms of the number and type of vulnerabilities
detected and prevented per hour. Our study shows IAST performed relatively well
compared to other techniques, performing second-best in both efficiency and
effectiveness. IAST detected eight Top-10 OWASP security risks compared to nine
by SMPT and seven for EMPT, DAST, and SAST. IAST found more vulnerabilities than
SMPT. The efficiency of IAST (2.14 VpH) is second to only EMPT (2.22 VpH). These
findings imply that our study benefited from using IAST when conducting
black-box security testing. In the context of a large, enterprise-scale web
application such as OpenMRS, RASP does not replace vulnerability detection,
while IAST is a powerful tool that complements other techniques.
