Title: ACTesting: Automated Cross-modal Testing Method of Text-to-Image Software
Authors: Siqi Gu, Chunrong Fang, Quanjun Zhang, Zhenyu Chen
ID: 2312.12933
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.12933

Abstract:
Recently, creative generative artificial intelligence software has emerged as a
pivotal assistant, enabling users to generate content and seek inspiration
rapidly. Text-to-Image (T2I) software, one of the most widely used, synthesizes
images with text input by engaging in a cross-modal process. However, despite
substantial advancements in the T2I engine, T2I software still encounters errors
when generating complex or non-realistic scenes, including omitting focal
entities, low image realism, and mismatched text-image information. The
cross-modal nature of T2I software complicates error detection for traditional
testing methods, and the absence of test oracles further exacerbates the
complexity of the testing process. To fill this gap, we propose ACTesting, an
Automated Cross-modal Testing Method of Text-to-Image Software, the first
testing method explicitly designed for T2I software. ACTesting utilizes the
metamorphic testing principle to address the oracle problem and identifies
cross-modal semantic consistency as its fundamental Metamorphic relation (MR) by
employing the Entity-relationship (ER) triples. We design three kinds of
mutation operators under the guidance of MR and the adaptability density
constraint to construct the new input text. After generating the images based on
the text, ACTesting verifies whether MR is satisfied by detecting the ER triples
across two modalities to detect the errors of T2I software. In our experiments
across five popular T2I software, ACTesting effectively generates
error-revealing tests, resulting in a decrease in text-image consistency by up
to 20% when compared to the baseline. Additionally, an ablation study
demonstrates the efficacy of the proposed mutation operators. The experimental
results validate that ACTesting can reliably identify errors within T2I
software.
