Title: Conceptual Mutation Testing for Student Programming Misconceptions
Authors: Siddhartha Prasad, Ben Greenman, Tim Nelson, Shriram Krishnamurthi
ID: 2401.00021
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.00021

Abstract:
Context: Students often misunderstand programming problem descriptions. This can
lead them to solve the wrong problem, which creates frustration, obstructs
learning, and imperils grades. Researchers have found that students can be made
to better understand the problem by writing examples before they start
programming. These examples are checked against correct and wrong
implementations -- analogous to mutation testing -- provided by course staff.
Doing so results in better student understanding of the problem as well as
better test suites to accompany the program, both of which are desirable
educational outcomes. Inquiry: Producing mutant implementations requires care.
If there are too many, or they are too obscure, students will end up spending a
lot of time on an unproductive task and also become frustrated. Instead, we want
a small number of mutants that each correspond to common problem misconceptions.
This paper presents a workflow with partial automation to produce mutants of
this form which, notably, are not those produced by mutation-testing tools.
Approach: We comb through student tests that fail a correct implementation. The
student misconceptions are embedded in these failures. We then use methods to
semantically cluster these failures. These clusters are then translated into
conceptual mutants. These can then be run against student data to determine
whether we they are better than prior methods. Some of these processes also
enjoy automation. Knowledge: We find that student misconceptions illustrated by
failing tests can be operationalized by the above process. The resulting mutants
do much better at identifying student misconceptions. Grounding: Our findings
are grounded in a manual analysis of student examples and a quantitative
evaluation of both our clustering techniques and our process for making
conceptual mutants. The clustering evaluation compares against a ground truth
using standard cluster-correspondence measures, while the mutant evaluation
examines how conceptual mutants perform against student data. Importance: Our
work contributes a workflow, with some automation, to reduce the cost and
increase the effectiveness of generating conceptually interesting mutants. Such
mutants can both improve learning outcomes and reduce student frustration,
leading to better educational outcomes. In the process, we also identify a
variation of mutation testing not commonly discussed in the software literature.
