Title: Forensic Video Analytic Software
Authors: Anton Jeran Ratnarajah, Sahani Goonetilleke, Dumindu Tissera, Kapilan Balagopalan, Ranga Rodrigo
ID: 2401.02960
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.02960

Abstract:
Law enforcement officials heavily depend on Forensic Video Analytic (FVA)
Software in their evidence extraction process. However present-day FVA software
are complex, time consuming, equipment dependent and expensive. Developing
countries struggle to gain access to this gateway to a secure haven. The term
forensic pertains the application of scientific methods to the investigation of
crime through post-processing, whereas surveillance is the close monitoring of
real-time feeds. The principle objective of this Final Year Project was to
develop an efficient and effective FVA Software, addressing the shortcomings
through a stringent and systematic review of scholarly research papers, online
databases and legal documentation. The scope spans multiple object detection,
multiple object tracking, anomaly detection, activity recognition, tampering
detection, general and specific image enhancement and video synopsis. Methods
employed include many machine learning techniques, GPU acceleration and
efficient, integrated architecture development both for real-time and
postprocessing. For this CNN, GMM, multithreading and OpenCV C++ coding were
used. The implications of the proposed methodology would rapidly speed up the
FVA process especially through the novel video synopsis research arena. This
project has resulted in three research outcomes Moving Object Based Collision
Free Video Synopsis, Forensic and Surveillance Analytic Tool Architecture and
Tampering Detection Inter-Frame Forgery. The results include forensic and
surveillance panel outcomes with emphasis on video synopsis and Sri Lankan
context. Principal conclusions include the optimization and efficient algorithm
integration to overcome limitations in processing power, memory and compromise
between real-time performance and accuracy.
