Title: Derivative-Free Optimization Methods for Handling Fixed Costs in Optimal Groundwater Remediation Design
Authors: Hemker, Thomas, Fowler, Kathleen
ID: zenodo.3536822
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/zenodo.3536822

Groundwater remediation design problems are routine in water resource
management. The starting point for such a design problem is to formulate an
objective function that represents a measure of the manager's goal. For example,
in plume migration control, we need to determine the cost to design a well field
to alter the direction of groundwater flow and thereby control the destination
of a contaminant. Constraints must be specified to ensure that the plume is
captured, the physical domain is protected, and the wells operate under
realistic conditions. Optimization algorithms must work in conjunction with
groundwater flow and possibly contaminant transport simulators to determine the
minimal cost well design subject to the constraints, but typically these
numerical simulation codes have been developed for many years and have usually
not been designed to meet the specific needs of optimization methods as, e.g.,
providing gradient information. Decision variables can be real-valued, in the
case of pumping rates and well locations, or integer valued in the case of the
number of wells in the design.  In this work we focus on formulations that
include a fixed installation cost as well as an operating cost, resulting in a
simulation-based nonlinear mixed-integer optimization problem. The motivation is
that our preliminary studies have shown that convergence to an unsatisfactory,
local minimum with many wells operating at low pumping rates is common when the
fixed cost is ignored.  The challenge in the fixed cost formulation is the
integer variable for the number of wells in the design. Removing a well from the
design space leads to a large decrease in cost meaning optimizers must be
equipped to either handle a mixed-integer or approximate mixed integer, black-
box problem and discontinuities in the objective function. Moreover since
evaluation of the objective function requires numerical results from a
simulation, derivative information is unavailable. Gradient based optimization
methods are not appropriate for these applications, hence methods that rely only
on function values are more appealing.  We compare three methods for handling
the installation cost on a hydraulic capture benchmarking problem proposed in
the literature. All the approaches described below do not use the gradient of
the objective function, only function values for minimization. In one approach,
we use penalty coefficients proposed in the literature for the installation term
to transform the discontinuous problem into a continuous one. In another
approach, we bypass including the number of wells as a decision variable by
defining an inactive-well threshold. In the course of the optimization, if a
well rate falls in this threshold, the well is removed from the design space,
leading to large discontinuities in the objective function. For the two above
formulations, we use the implicit filtering algorithm, a method which uses a
sequence of finite difference gradients, for minimization. In the third
approach, we use sequential stochastic modeling to build surrogate functions to
approximate the original objective function. With this procedure the use of a
branch and bound technique becomes possible to solve the mixed integer problem
in contrast to methods working directly on the simulation results, which impedes
relaxation of integer variables. We present promising preliminary numerical
results on the benchmarking problem and point the way towards improvement and
future work.
